 
The skeletal system is made up of bones, cartilage, and ligaments. The skeletal system has many important functions in your body. What bones protect the heart and lungs? What protects the brain?. 
The force exerted by circulating blood on the walls of blood vessels is called blood pressure . Blood pressure is highest in arteries and lowest in veins. When you have your blood pressure checked, it is the blood pressure in arteries that is measured. High blood pressure, or hypertension , is a serious health risk but can often be controlled with lifestyle changes or medication. You can learn more about hypertension by watching the animation at this link: http://www. healthcentral. com/high-blood-pressure/introduction-47-115. html . 
Bacteria are the most diverse and abundant group of organisms on Earth. They live in almost all environments. They are found in the ocean, the soil, and the intestines of animals. They are even found in rocks deep below Earth’s surface. Any surface that has not been sterilized is likely to be covered with bacteria. The total number of bacteria in the world is amazing. It’s estimated to be 5 × 10 30 , or five million trillion. You have more bacteria in and on your body than you have body cells!. 
Ecosystems need energy. Many ecosystems get their energy in the form of sunlight, which enters the ecosystem through photosynthesis . This energy then flows through the ecosystem, passed from producers to consumers . Plants are producers in many ecosystems. Energy flows from plants to the herbivores that eat the plants, and then to carnivores that eat the herbivores. The flow of energy depicts interactions of organisms within an ecosystem. 
The types of living plants today reflect the evolutionary past of the plant kingdom. From tiny nonvascular mosses to large flowering and fruiting trees, there are modern plants that represent each of the major evolutionary changes that occurred in this important eukaryotic kingdom. 
The key to continued growth and repair of plant cells is meristem . Meristem is a type of plant tissue consisting of undifferentiated cells that can continue to divide and differentiate. Meristem at the tips of roots and stems allows them to grow in length. This is called primary growth. Meristem within and around vascular tissues allows growth in width. This is called secondary growth. 
Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling down on an object, whereas buoyant force pushes up on an object. Which force is greater determines whether an object sinks or floats. Look at the Figure below . On the left, the object’s weight is the same as the buoyant force acting on it, so the object floats. On the right, the object’s weight is greater than the buoyant force acting on it, so the object sinks. 
The first organisms were made of only one cell ( Figure below ). The earliest cells were prokaryotes . Prokaryotic cells are surrounded by a cell membrane. They do not have a nucleus. Their organelles are free in the cell. The cells get their nutrients directly from the water they live in. The cells need to use these nutrients to live and grow. 
Cooling and forming crystals. Deep within the Earth, temperatures can get hot enough to melt rock. This molten material is called magma. As it cools, crystals grow, forming an igneous rock. The crystals will grow larger if the magma cools slowly, as it does if it remains deep within the Earth. If the magma cools quickly, the crystals will be very small. 
All three containers contain a substance with the same mass, but the substances are in different states. In the left-hand container, the substance is a gas, which has spread to fill its container. It takes both the shape and volume of the container. In the middle container, the substance is a liquid, which has spread to take the shape of its container but not the volume. In the right-hand container, the substance is a solid, which takes neither the shape nor the volume of its container. 
Viruses , like the one depicted in Figure below , are tiny particles that may cause disease. Human diseases caused by viruses include the common cold and flu. Do you think viruses are prokaryotes or eukaryotes? The answer may surprise you. Viruses are not cells at all, so they are neither prokaryotes nor eukaryotes. 
Mushrooms and other fungi obtain energy from other organisms. That’s why you often see fungi growing on a fallen tree; the rotting tree is their source of energy ( Figure below ). 
Thermoregulatory Adjustments The fetus floats in warm amniotic fluid that is maintained at a temperature of approximately 98.6°F with very little fluctuation. Birth exposes newborns to a cooler environment in which they have to regulate their own body temperature. Newborns have a higher ratio of surface area to volume than adults. This means that their body has less volume throughout which to produce heat, and more surface area from which to lose heat. As a result, newborns produce heat more slowly and lose it more quickly. Newborns also have immature musculature that limits their ability to generate heat by shivering. Moreover, their nervous systems are underdeveloped, so they cannot quickly constrict superficial blood vessels in response to cold. They also have little subcutaneous fat for insulation. All these factors make it harder for newborns to maintain their body temperature. Newborns, however, do have a special method for generating heat: nonshivering thermogenesis, which involves the breakdown of brown adipose tissue, or brown fat, which is distributed over the back, chest, and shoulders. Brown fat differs from the more familiar white fat in two ways: • It is highly vascularized. This allows for faster delivery of oxygen, which leads to faster cellular respiration. • It is packed with a special type of mitochondria that are able to engage in cellular respiration reactions that produce less ATP and more heat than standard cellular respiration reactions. 
32.2 Pollination and Fertilization For fertilization to occur in angiosperms, pollen has to be transferred to the stigma of a flower: a process known as pollination. Gymnosperm pollination involves the transfer of pollen from a male cone to a female cone. When the pollen of the flower is transferred to the stigma of the same flower, it is called self-pollination. Cross-pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from one flower to another flower on the same plant, or another plant. Cross-pollination requires pollinating agents such as water, wind, or animals, and increases genetic diversity. After the pollen lands on the stigma, the tube cell gives rise to the pollen tube, through which the generative nucleus migrates. The pollen tube gains entry through the micropyle on the ovule sac. The generative cell divides to form two sperm cells: one fuses with the egg to form the diploid zygote, and the other fuses with the polar nuclei to form the endosperm, which is triploid in nature. This is known as double fertilization. After fertilization, the zygote divides to form the embryo and the fertilized ovule forms the seed. The walls of the ovary form the fruit in which the seeds develop. The seed, when mature, will germinate under favorable conditions and give rise to the diploid sporophyte. 
African Giraffes. Giraffes feed on leaves high in trees. Their long necks allow them to reach leaves that other ground animals cannot. 
Metals have a wide range of melting points, but most are quite high. Only one metal (mercury) melts below room temperature. Others (such as gallium) are solid at room temperature but would melt at body temperature, so they can be melted simply by holding them in your hand. On the other end of the spectrum, tungsten has a melting point of 3422°C. Figure below shows the melting points of various elements in their most common pure form. 
Platelets ( Figure below ) are very small, but they are very important in blood clotting. Platelets are not cells. They are sticky little pieces of larger cells. Platelets bud off large cells that stay in the bone marrow. When a blood vessel gets cut, platelets stick to the injured areas. They release chemicals called clotting factors, which cause proteins to form over the wound. This web of proteins catches red blood cells and forms a clot. This clot stops more blood from leaving the body through the cut blood vessel. The clot also stops bacteria from entering the body. Platelets survive in the blood for ten days before they are removed by the liver and spleen. 
invertebrates produce uric acid. Animals that secrete urea as the primary nitrogenous waste material are called ureotelic animals. 
When an element gains one or more electrons, an anion is formed. Nonmetals typically become anions when they interact with other chemical species. 
Top: Flickr:LearningLark; Bottom: Laura Guerin (CK-12 Foundation). Amylase and pepsin are used in our digestive system . Top: CC BY 2.0; Bottom: CC BY-NC 3.0. 
solution. In addition, sucrose does not undergo reactions that are typical of aldehydes and ketones. Therefore, sucrose is a nonreducing sugar. The hydrolysis of sucrose in dilute acid or through the action of the enzyme sucrase(also known as invertase) gives an equimolar mixture of glucose and fructose. This 1:1 mixture is referred to as invert sugar because it rotates plane-polarized light in the opposite direction than sucrose. The hydrolysis reaction has several practical applications. Sucrose readily recrystallizes from a solution, but invert sugar has a much greater tendency to remain in solution. In the manufacture of jelly and candy and in the canning of fruit, the recrystallization of sugar is undesirable. Therefore, conditions leading to the hydrolysis of sucrose are employed in these processes. Moreover, because fructose is sweeter than sucrose, the hydrolysis adds to the sweetening effect. Bees carry out this reaction when they make honey. The average American consumes more than 100 lb of sucrose every year. About twothirds of this amount is ingested in soft drinks, presweetened cereals, and other highly processed foods. The widespread use of sucrose is a contributing factor to obesity and tooth decay. Carbohydrates such as sucrose, are converted to fat when the caloric intake exceeds the body’s requirements, and sucrose causes tooth decay by promoting the formation of plaque that sticks to teeth. 
called an alkaline battery when adapted to operate under alkaline conditions. Button batteries have a high output-to-mass ratio; lithium–iodine batteries consist of a solid electrolyte; the nickel– cadmium (NiCad) battery is rechargeable; and the lead–acid battery, which is also rechargeable, does not require the electrodes to be in separate compartments. A fuel cell requires an external supply of reactants as the products of the reaction are continuously removed. In a fuel cell, energy is not stored; electrical energy is provided by a chemical reaction. 
The first step in the process of inductive reasoning is making specific observations. In the periodic table of elements, which we will discuss later, there is a group of metals with similar properties called the alkali metals. The alkali metals include elements such as sodium and potassium. If I put sodium or potassium in water, I will observe a very violent reaction every time. I draw a general conclusion from these observations: all alkali metals will react violently with water. 
A person can live a normal, healthy life with just one kidney. However, at least one kidney must function properly to maintain life. Diseases that threaten the health and functioning of the kidneys include kidney stones, infections, and diabetes. 
The chain of amino acids keeps growing until a stop codon is reached. Then the chain is released from the ribosome. 
Like many other animals, sheep travel in herds. The tendency is for each individual sheep to stay with the herd. However, a sheep may sometimes wander off, depending on how strong the attraction is for a particular food or water supply. At other times, a sheep may become frightened and run off. Whether a sheep chooses to stay with the herd or go its own way depends on the balance between attraction to the herd and attraction to the outside influence. 
Clouds block sunlight in the day. Clouds trap heat in the atmosphere at night. 
Adding more heat energy to Earth’s atmosphere also causes more extreme weather and changes in precipitation patterns. Global warming is already causing food and water shortages and species extinctions. These problems will only grow worse unless steps are taken to curb greenhouse gases and global climate change. 
The major wind belts push the water in the surface currents. The water moves in the direction of :. 
Nearly all fish reproduce sexually, and most species have separate sexes. Those without separate sexes avoid self-fertilization by producing sperm and eggs at different times. Each fish typically produces a large number of gametes. In most fish species, fertilization takes place externally. These fish are oviparous . Eggs are laid and embryos develop outside the mother’s body. In a minority of fish, including sharks, eggs develop inside the mother’s body but without nourishment from the mother. These fish are ovoviviparous . 
The female reproductive system consists of structures that produce eggs and secrete female sex hormones. They also provide a site for fertilization and enable the development and birth of a fetus. They include the vagina, uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes. 
Figure 4.11 The nucleus stores chromatin (DNA plus proteins) in a gel-like substance called the nucleoplasm. The nucleolus is a condensed region of chromatin where ribosome synthesis occurs. The boundary of the nucleus is called the nuclear envelope. It consists of two phospholipid bilayers: an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The nuclear membrane is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum. Nuclear pores allow substances to enter and exit the nucleus. 
It is necessary to distinguish between the two types of covalent bonds in a C 2 H 4 molecule. A sigma bond (σ bond) is a bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in an end-to-end fashion, with the electron density concentrated between the nuclei of the bonding atoms. A pi bond (π bond) is a bond formed by the overlap of orbitals in a side-by-side fashion, with the electron density concentrated above and below the plane of the nuclei of the bonding atoms. Figure below shows the two types of bonding in C 2 H 4 . The sp 2 hybrid orbitals are orange and the p z orbital is green. Three sigma bonds are formed by each carbon atom with its hybrid orbitals. The pi bond is the “second” bond of the double bond between the carbon atoms and is shown as an elongated blue lobe that extends both above and below the plane of the molecule, which contains the six atoms and all of the sigma bonds. 
Salts Recall that salts are formed when ions form ionic bonds. In these reactions, one atom gives up one or more electrons, and thus becomes positively charged, whereas the other accepts one or more electrons and becomes negatively charged. You can now define a salt as a substance that, when dissolved in water, dissociates into ions other than H+ or OH–. This fact is important in distinguishing salts from acids and bases, discussed next. A typical salt, NaCl, dissociates completely in water (Figure 2.15). The positive and negative regions on the water molecule (the hydrogen and oxygen ends respectively) attract the negative chloride and positive sodium ions, pulling them away from each other. Again, whereas nonpolar and polar covalently bonded compounds break apart into molecules in solution, salts dissociate into ions. These ions are electrolytes; they are capable of conducting an electrical current in solution. This property is critical to the function of ions in transmitting nerve impulses and prompting muscle contraction. 
Most of the time, you breathe without thinking about it. Breathing is mostly an involuntary action that is controlled by a part of your brain that also controls your heart beat. If you swim, do yoga, or sing, you know you can control your breathing, however. Taking air into the body through the nose and mouth is called inhalation . Pushing air out of the body through the nose or mouth is called exhalation . The woman pictured below is exhaling before she surfaces from the pool water ( Figure below ). 
Plants are the primary producers in terrestrial biomes. They make food for themselves and other organisms by photosynthesis. The major plants in a given biome, in turn, help determine the types of animals and other organisms that can live there. 
GFCI stands for ground-fault circuit interrupter. GFCI outlets are typically found in bathrooms and kitchens where the use of water poses a risk of shock (because water is a good electric conductor). A GFCI outlet contains a device that monitors the amounts of current leaving and returning to the outlet. If less current is returning than leaving, this means that current is escaping. When this occurs, a tiny circuit breaker in the outlet opens the circuit. The breaker can be reset by pushing a button on the outlet cover. 
Geologists look for oil in folded layers of rock called anticlines. Oil moves through permeable rock and is trapped by the impermeable cap rock. 
The magnetic field has north and south poles. The magnetic poles do not exactly match the geographic poles. So the North Magnetic Pole is not the same as the geographic North Pole. The same is true of the South Pole. The magnetic field is created by the movement of molten metal in the outer core. 
Reproduction is how organisms produce offspring. The ability to reproduce is a characteristic of all living things. In some species, all the offspring are genetically identical to the parent. In other species, each offspring is genetically unique. Look at the kittens in Figure below . They are brothers and sisters, but they are all different from each other. Why does this happen in some species but not others? It’s because there are two types of reproduction. Reproduction can be sexual or asexual. 
Skeletal Muscle Fiber Structure Each skeletal muscle fiber is a skeletal muscle cell. These cells are incredibly large, with diameters of up to 100 µm and lengths of up to 30 cm. The plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber is called the sarcolemma. The sarcolemma is the site of action potential conduction, which triggers muscle contraction. Within each muscle fiber are myofibrils—long cylindrical structures that lie parallel to the muscle fiber. Myofibrils run the entire length of the muscle fiber, and because they are only approximately 1.2 µm in diameter, hundreds to thousands can be found inside one muscle fiber. They attach to the sarcolemma at their ends, so that as myofibrils shorten, the entire muscle cell contracts (Figure 38.34). 
Drip irrigation uses much less water than other methods. 
The autonomic nervous system serves as the relay between the CNS and the internal organs. It controls the lungs, the heart, smooth muscle, and exocrine and endocrine glands. The autonomic nervous system controls these organs largely without conscious control; it can continuously monitor the conditions of these different systems and implement changes as needed. Signaling to the target tissue usually involves two synapses: a preganglionic neuron (originating in the CNS) synapses to a neuron in a ganglion that, in turn, synapses on the target organ, as illustrated in Figure 35.26. There are two divisions of the autonomic nervous system that often have opposing effects: the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. Sympathetic Nervous System The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for the “fight or flight” response that occurs when an animal encounters a dangerous situation. One way to remember this is to think of the surprise a person feels when encountering a snake (“snake” and “sympathetic” both begin with “s”). Examples of functions controlled by the sympathetic nervous system include an accelerated heart rate and inhibited digestion. These functions help prepare an organism’s body for the physical strain required to escape a potentially dangerous situation or to fend off a predator. 
The generation of an isolated but open system, which we might call a protocell, was a critical step in the origin of life. Such an isolated system has important properties that are likely to have facilitated the further development of life. For example, because of the membrane boundary, changes that occur within one such structure will not be shared with neighboring systems. Rather, they accumulated in, and favor the survival of, one system over its neighbors. Such systems can also reproduce in a crude way by fragmentation. If changes within one such system improved its stability, its ability to accumulate resources, or its ability to survive and reproduce, that system, and its progeny, would be likely to become more common. As these changes accumulate and are passed from parent to offspring, the organisms will inevitably evolve, as we will see in detail in the next chapter. As in living systems today, the earliest steps in the formation of the first organisms required a source of energy to maintain the non-equilibrium living system. There are really two choices for the source of this energy, either light (electromagnetic radiation from the sun) or thermodynamically unstable chemicals present in the environment. There have been a number of plausible scenarios, based on various observations, for the steps leading to life. For example, a recent study based on the analysis of the genes (and the proteins that they encode) found in modern organisms, suggests that the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) arose in association with hydrothermal vents.60 But whether this reflects LUCA or an ancestor of LUCA that became adapted to living is association with hydrothermal vents is difficult (and perhaps impossible) to resolve unambiguously, particularly since LUCA lived ~3.4-3.8 billion years ago and cannot be studied directly. Mapping the history of life on earth Assuming, as seems likely, that life arose spontaneously, we can now look at what we know about the fossil record to better understand the diversification of life and life’s impact on the Earth. This is probably best done by starting with what we know about where the Universe and Earth came from. The current scientific model for the origin of the universe is known as the “Big Bang” (also known as the “primeval atom” or the “cosmic egg”), an idea originally proposed by the priest, physicist and astronomer Georges Lemaître (1894-1966).61 The Big Bang model arose from efforts to answer the question of whether the fuzzy nebulae identified by astronomers were located within or outside of our galaxy. This required some way to determine how far these nebulae were from Earth. Edwin Hubble (1889-1953) and his co-workers were the first to realize that nebulae were in fact galaxies in their own right, each very much like our own Milky Way and each is composed of many billions of stars. This was a surprising result. It made Earth, sitting on the edge of one (the Milky Way) among many, many galaxies seem less important – a change in cosmological perspective similar to that associated with the idea that the Sun, rather than Earth, was the center of the solar system (and the Universe). To measure the movement of galaxies with respect to Earth, Hubble and colleagues combined to types of observations. The first of these allowed them to estimate the distance from the Earth to. 
Polyester molecules make excellent fibers and are used in many fabrics. A knitted polyester tube, which is biologically inert, can be used in surgery to repair or replace diseased sections of blood vessels. PET is used to make bottles for soda pop and other beverages. It is also formed into films called Mylar. When magnetically coated, Mylar tape is used in audio- and videocassettes. Synthetic arteries can be made from PET, polytetrafluoroethylene, and other polymers. 
Solutions may be prepared in which a solute concentration exceeds its solubility. Such solutions are said to be supersaturated, and they are interesting examples of nonequilibrium states. For example, the carbonated beverage in an open container that has not yet “gone flat” is supersaturated with carbon dioxide gas; given time, the CO2 concentration will decrease until it reaches its equilibrium value. 
Sepals protect the developing flower while it is still a bud. Sepals are usually green, which camouflages the bud from possible consumers. 
Examples of acceleration include a person riding a carousel and a skydiver in free fall. 
A wobble base pair is a non-Watson Crick base pairing between two nucleotides in RNA molecules. The four main wobble base pairs are guanine-uracil, inocine-uracil, inosine-adenine, and inosine-cytosine. Wobble base pairs are fundamental in RNA secondary structure and are critical for the proper translation of the genetic code. Inosine is a nucleoside that is formed from the hydrolytic deamination of adenine. Structurally, it resembles guanine, but lacks the 2-amino group. This lack of the 2-amino group allows inosine to form base pairs with uracil, cytosine and adenine, making it a particularly wobbly base. 
Mating refers to the union of a male and female of the same species for reproduction. The relationship between mates varies by species. Adults may have many mates, or they may mate with just one individual. Mates may stay together only while mating, for an entire breeding season, or even for life. 
Some materials have negative heats of solution; the dissolution of one of these solutes in water is an exothermic process. Heat is released, causing a net increase in the temperature of the solution. Conversely, other substances have positive heats of solution. For example, the dissolution of potassium nitrate in water is an endothermic process. The resulting absorption of energy causes the solution to become colder. Calculations involving heats of solutions follow the same basic approach that we have used with other enthalpy problems. 
Pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from a male to female cone. If sperm then travel from the pollen to an egg so fertilization can occur, a diploid zygote results. The zygote develops into an embryo within a seed, which forms from the ovule inside the female cone. If the seed germinates, it may grow into a mature sporophyte tree, which repeats the cycle. 
Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celled organisms are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms make up molecules; these in turn make up cell organelles and other cellular inclusions. In multicellular organisms (Figure 1.10), similar cells form tissues. Tissues, in turn, collaborate to create organs (body structures with a distinct function). Organs work together to form organ systems. Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli. 
Acid rain is rain that has a pH less than 5 ( Figure below ). Acidity is measured on the pH scale . Lower numbers are more acidic, and higher numbers are less acidic (also called more alkaline ). An acid has a pH of less than 7. The pH of normal rain is 5.6. It’s slightly acidic because carbon dioxide in the air dissolves in rain. This forms carbonic acid, a weak acid. 
7.3 Errors in Meiosis The number, size, shape, and banding pattern of chromosomes make them easily identifiable in a karyogram and allow for the assessment of many chromosomal abnormalities. Disorders in chromosome number, or aneuploidies, are typically lethal to the embryo, although a few trisomic genotypes are viable. Because of X inactivation, aberrations in sex chromosomes typically have milder effects on an individual. Aneuploidies also include instances in which segments of a chromosome are duplicated or deleted. Chromosome structures also may be rearranged, for example by inversion or translocation. Both of these aberrations can result in negative effects on development, or death. Because they force chromosomes to assume contorted pairings during meiosis I, inversions and translocations are often associated with reduced fertility because of the likelihood of nondisjunction. 
Wind power, a renewable resource, shown here in a modern wind energy farm. The wind is used to turn turbines that generate electricity. 
Whales and bats have the trait of echolocation. This is the ability to locate objects in the dark by bouncing sound waves off them. The most recent common ancestor of whales and bats did not have this trait. Apply lesson concepts to explain how the trait evolved in whales and bats. 
Like all organisms, plants detect and respond to stimuli in their environment. Their main response is to change how they grow. 
Most circuits have devices such as light bulbs that convert electric energy to other forms of energy. In the case of a light bulb, electricity is converted to light and thermal energy. 
Metal is regularly used in the human body for hip and knee implants. Most implants need to be replaced over time because, among other things, metal does not bond with bone. Researchers are trying to find better metal coatings that would allow metalto-bone bonding. One challenge is to find a coating that has an expansion coefficient similar to that of metal. If the expansion coefficients are too different, the thermal stresses during the manufacturing process lead to cracks at the coating-metal interface. Another example of thermal stress is found in the mouth. Dental fillings can expand differently from tooth enamel. It can give pain when eating ice cream or having a hot drink. Cracks might occur in the filling. Metal fillings (gold, silver, etc. ) are being replaced by composite fillings (porcelain), which have smaller coefficients of expansion, and are closer to those of teeth. 
Organisms that live in a hypotonic environment such as freshwater, need a way to prevent their cells from taking in too much water by osmosis. A contractile vacuole is a type of vacuole that removes excess water from a cell. Freshwater protists, such as the paramecia shown in Figure below , have a contractile vacuole. The vacuole is surrounded by several canals, which absorb water by osmosis from the cytoplasm. After the canals fill with water, the water is pumped into the vacuole. When the vacuole is full, it pushes the water out of the cell through a pore. Other protists, such as members of the genus Amoeba , have contractile vacuoles that move to the surface of the cell when full and release the water into the environment. 
Rivers and streams flow across continents. They cut away at rock, forming river valleys ( Figure below ). These are destructive forces. The bits and pieces of rock carried by rivers are deposited where rivers meet the oceans. These can form deltas, like the Mississippi River delta. They can also form barrier islands, like Padre Island in Texas. Rivers bring sand to the shore, which forms our beaches. These are constructive forces. 
Some people recover from spinal cord injuries. But many people are paralyzed for life. Thanks to the work of Christopher Reeve ( Figure below ), more research is being done on spinal cord injuries now than ever before. For example, scientists are trying to discover ways to regrow damaged spinal cord neurons. 
Some objects produce light without becoming very hot. They generate light through chemical reactions or other processes. Producing light without heat is called luminescence . Luminescence, in turn, can occur in several different ways:. 
Lithospheric plates do a lot of moving on Earth's surface. Slabs of lithosphere smash into each other. They move sideways past each other along faults. Where conditions are right, magma rises through solid rock. It's no wonder that rocks experience stress! Rocks respond differently to different types of stress and under different conditions. 
Any organic material can be made into electricity. But some materials are better than others. Wastes can be used, like almond shells. Biomass power is a great use of wastes. It's hard to use wastes as a consistent large scale source of energy though. 
where the (am) designation refers to an ammonia solution, analogous to (aq) used to indicate aqueous solutions. Without a catalyst, the reaction in Equation 21.20 tends to be rather slow. In many cases, the alkali metal amide salt (MNH2) is not very soluble in liquid ammonia and precipitates, but when dissolved, very concentrated solutions of the alkali metal are produced. One mole of Cs metal, for example, will dissolve in as little as 53 mL (40 g) of liquid ammonia. The pure metal is easily recovered when the ammonia evaporates. Solutions of alkali metals in liquid ammonia are intensely colored and good conductors of electricity due to the presence of solvated electrons (e−, NH3), which are not attached to single atoms. A solvated electron is loosely associated with a cavity in the ammonia solvent that is stabilized by hydrogen bonds. Alkali metal–liquid ammonia solutions of about 3 M or less are deep blue (Figure 21.11 "Alkali Metal–Liquid Ammonia Solutions") and conduct electricity about 10 times better than an aqueous NaCl solution because of the high mobility of the solvated electrons. As the concentration of the metal increases above 3 M, the color changes to metallic bronze or gold, and the conductivity increases to a value comparable with that of the pure liquid metals. 
The water cycle takes place on, above, and below Earth’s surface. In the cycle, water occurs as water vapor, liquid water, and ice. Many processes are involved as water changes state in the cycle. The atmosphere is an exchange pool for water. Ice masses, aquifers, and the deep ocean are water reservoirs. 
The driving force to combine with nonmetals to create ionic compounds varies quite a bit between different metals. Some pure metals, like cesium and potassium, are so eager to react that they must be stored under oil to avoid an immediate reaction with the oxygen present in air. Others, like platinum and gold, are stable enough that they can be found in nature as pure metals rather than as the cationic portion of an ionic compound. Gradual degradation of a material due to its exposure to the environment is known as corrosion . Metals like gold and platinum are unusually resistant to corrosion, which makes them especially valuable for both structural and decorative purposes. 
The control rods play an important role in the modulation of the nuclear chain reaction (usually a collision of a neutron with uranium). Each collision produces more neutrons than were present initially. If left unsupervised, the reaction would soon get out of control. Rods are commonly made of boron or a number of metals and metal alloys. The purpose of the control rods is to absorb neutrons to regulate the rate of the chain reaction so that the water does not overheat and destroy the reactor. 
Gain-of-function mutations result in the gene product or protein having a new and abnormal function and usually result in a dominant phenotype. Examples of gain of function mutations occur in the thyroid hormone receptor gene. 
Like mammals and birds, and unlike other reptiles, crocodiles have a four-chambered heart. But, unlike mammals, blood with and without oxygen can be mixed. 
Glycogen is an even more highly branched polysaccharide of glucose monomers that serves a function of energy storage in animals. Glycogen is made and stored primarily in the cells of the liver and muscles. 
Proteins are organic compounds made up of amino acids. 
Lysosomes are like the recycling trucks that carry waste away from the factory. Lysosomes have digestive enzymes that break down old molecules into parts that can be recycled. 
There are three types of mechanical waves. They differ in how they travel through a medium. The three types are transverse, longitudinal, and surface waves. All three types are described in detail below. 
In this lesson, you read how scientists determine the relative ages of sedimentary rock layers. The law of superposition determines which rock layers are younger or older than others. 
Modern reptiles live in many different habitats. They can be found on every continent except Antarctica. 
27.8 Polarization • Polarization is the attribute that wave oscillations have a definite direction relative to the direction of propagation of the wave. • EM waves are transverse waves that may be polarized. • The direction of polarization is defined to be the direction parallel to the electric field of the EM wave. • Unpolarized light is composed of many rays having random polarization directions. • Light can be polarized by passing it through a polarizing filter or other polarizing material. The intensity I of polarized light after passing through a polarizing filter is I = I 0 cos 2 θ, where I 0 is the original intensity and θ is the angle between the direction of polarization and the axis of the filter. • Polarization is also produced by reflection. • Brewster’s law states that reflected light will be completely polarized at the angle of reflection θ b , known as Brewster’s angle, given by a statement known as Brewster’s law: reflected light travel and. 
3.3 The Nucleus and DNA Replication The nucleus is the command center of the cell, containing the genetic instructions for all of the materials a cell will make (and thus all of its functions it can perform). The nucleus is encased within a membrane of two interconnected lipid bilayers, side-by-side. This nuclear envelope is studded with protein-lined pores that allow materials to be trafficked into and out of. 
Earthquake magnitude affects how much damage is done in an earthquake. A larger earthquake damages more buildings and kills more people than a smaller earthquake. But that's not the only factor that determines earthquake damage. The location of an earthquake relative to a large city is important. More damage is done if the ground shakes for a long time. 
Birds are four-limbed, endothermic vertebrates with wings and feathers. They produce amniotic eggs and are the most numerous class of vertebrates. 
Eukaryotic cell division involves mitosis and cytokinesis. 
One of the most effective ways to cut metal is with an oxy-acetylene torch. Very high temperatures are obtained when acetylene burns in oxygen. Mixed 1:1 with oxygen, a temperature of over 3000°C can be achieved. The amount of energy released is high – the net heat of combustion is 1300 kJ/mole. Safety precautions need to be observed since the gas is very explosive. For welding and cutting, the oxy-acetylene torch is one of the best ways to go. 
Anatomy of the Eye The photoreceptive cells of the eye, where transduction of light to nervous impulses occurs, are located in the retina (shown in Figure 36.17) on the inner surface of the back of the eye. But light does not impinge on the retina unaltered. It passes through other layers that process it so that it can be interpreted by the retina (Figure 36.17b). The cornea, the front transparent layer of the eye, and the crystalline lens, a transparent convex structure behind the cornea, both refract (bend) light to focus the image on the retina. The iris, which is conspicuous as the colored part of the eye, is a circular muscular ring lying between the lens and cornea that regulates the amount of light entering the eye. In conditions of high ambient light, the iris contracts, reducing the size of the pupil at its center. In conditions of low light, the iris relaxes and the pupil enlarges. 
In addition to these properties, other physical properties of matter include the state of matter. States of matter include liquid, solid, and gaseous states. For example at 20°C, coal exists as a solid and water exists as a liquid. Additional examples of physical properties include:. 
The somatic nervous system also controls some unconscious movements called reflexes. A reflex is a very rapid motor response that is not directed by the brain. In a reflex, nerve impulses travel to and from the spinal cord in a reflex arc, like the one in Figure below . In this example, the person jerks his hand away from the flame without any conscious thought. It happens unconsciously because the nerve impulses bypass the brain. 
Most metalloids have some physical properties of metals and some physical properties of nonmetals. They fall between metals and nonmetals in their ability to conduct heat and electricity. They are shiny like metals but brittle like nonmetals. All exist as solids at room temperature. 
The process in which a liquid boils and changes to a gas is called vaporization . The temperature at which a liquid boils is its boiling point. The boiling point of water is 100°C (212°F). Other types of matter may have higher or lower boiling points. For example, the boiling point of table salt is 1413°C. The boiling point of nitrogen is -196°C. 
Figure 41.6 The nephron is the functional unit of the kidney. The glomerulus and convoluted tubules are located in the kidney cortex, while collecting ducts are located in the pyramids of the medulla. (credit: modification of work by NIDDK). 
Chemistry in Everyday Life CERN Particle Accelerator Located near Geneva, the CERN (“Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire,” or European Council for Nuclear Research) Laboratory is the world’s premier center for the investigations of the fundamental particles that make up matter. It contains the 27-kilometer (17 mile) long, circular Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the largest particle accelerator in the world (Figure 21.13). In the LHC, particles are boosted to high energies and are then made to collide with each other or with stationary targets at nearly the speed of light. Superconducting electromagnets are used to produce a strong magnetic field that guides the particles around the ring. Specialized, purpose-built detectors observe and record the results of these collisions, which are then analyzed by CERN scientists using powerful computers. 
Summary 20.1 Hydrocarbons Strong, stable bonds between carbon atoms produce complex molecules containing chains, branches, and rings. The chemistry of these compounds is called organic chemistry. Hydrocarbons are organic compounds composed of only carbon and hydrogen. The alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons—that is, hydrocarbons that contain only single bonds. Alkenes contain one or more carbon-carbon double bonds. Alkynes contain one or more carbon-carbon triple bonds. Aromatic hydrocarbons contain ring structures with delocalized π electron systems. 
32.5 Fusion While basking in the warmth of the summer sun, a student reads of the latest breakthrough in achieving sustained thermonuclear power and vaguely recalls hearing about the cold fusion controversy. The three are connected. The Sun’s energy is produced by nuclear fusion (see Figure 32.15). Thermonuclear power is the name given to the use of controlled nuclear fusion as an energy source. While research in the area of thermonuclear power is progressing, high temperatures and containment difficulties remain. The cold fusion controversy centered around unsubstantiated claims of practical fusion power at room temperatures. 
Most modern seed plants are angiosperms that produce seeds in the ovaries of flowers. 
One of the first uses of rockets in space was to launch satellites. A satellite is an object that orbits a larger object. An orbit is a circular or elliptical path around an object. Natural objects in orbit are called natural satellites. The Moon is a natural satellite. Human-made objects in orbit are called artificial satellites. There are more and more artificial satellites orbiting Earth all the time. They all get into space using some sort of rocket. 
Using Lewis Dot Symbols to Describe Covalent Bonding The valence electron configurations of the constituent atoms of a covalent compound are important factors in determining its structure, stoichiometry, and properties. For example, chlorine, with seven valence electrons, is one electron short of an octet. If two chlorine atoms share their unpaired electrons by making a covalent bond and forming Cl2, they can each complete their valence shell:. 
In benzene, the true bonding between carbon atoms is neither a single nor a double bond. Rather, all of the bonds are a hybrid of a single and double bond. In benzene, the pi bonding electrons are free to move completely around the ring. Delocalized electrons are electrons that are not confined to the bond between two atoms, but are instead allowed to move between three or more. The delocalization of the electrons in benzene can best be shown by showing benzene with a ring inside the hexagon, with the hydrogen atoms understood. 
Humans have been making and using magnifying lenses for thousands of years. The term "telescope" was coined by the Italian scientist and mathematician Galileo Galilei (1564–1642). Galileo built the first telescope in 1608. His telescope used two lenses to make distant objects appear both nearer and larger. He subsequently made many improvements to telescope design. 
A pure substance is called an element . An element is a pure substance because it cannot be separated into any other substances. Currently, 92 different elements are known to exist in nature, although additional elements have been formed in labs. All matter consists of one or more of these elements. Some elements are very common; others are relatively rare. The most common element in the universe is hydrogen, which is part of Earth’s atmosphere and a component of water. The most common element in Earth’s atmosphere is nitrogen, and the most common element in Earth’s crust is oxygen. Several other elements are described in the musical video at this URL:. 
Phospholipids are the major components of cell membranes. 
The sympathetic division controls internal organs and glands during emergencies. It prepares the body for fight or flight ( Figure below ). For example, it increases the heart rate and the flow of blood to the legs, so you can run away from danger. 
Some springs have water that contains minerals. Groundwater dissolves minerals out of the rock as it seeps through the pores. The water in some springs is hot because it is heated by hot magma. Many hot springs are also mineral springs. That’s because hot water can dissolve more minerals than cold water. 
Bacterial Disease Vectors. Ticks spread bacteria that cause Lyme disease. Deerflies spread bacteria that cause tularemia. 
The cis isomer has the two single hydrogen atoms on the same side of the molecule, while the trans isomer has them on opposite sides of the molecule. In both molecules, the bonding order of the atoms is the same. In order for geometric isomers to exist, there must be a rigid structure in the molecule to prevent free rotation around a bond. If the double bond in an alkene was capable of rotating, the two geometric isomers above would not exist. In addition, the two carbon atoms must each have two different groups attached in order for there to be geometric isomers. Propene has no geometric isomers because one of the carbon atoms has two single hydrogens bonded to it. 
Matter has both physical and chemical properties. Physical properties can be measured or observed without matter changing to a different substance. 
The stability of an ecosystem depends on the actions of the decomposers. Examples of decomposers include mushrooms on a decaying log. Bacteria in the soil are also decomposers. Imagine what would happen if there were no decomposers. Wastes and the remains of dead organisms would pile up and the nutrients within the waste and dead organisms would not be released back into the ecosystem. Producers would not have enough nutrients. The carbon and nitrogen necessary to build organic compounds, and then cells, allowing an organism to grow, would be insufficient. Other nutrients necessary for an organism to function properly would also not be sufficient. Essentially, many organisms could not exist. 
Populations can be described in terms of size, density, and distribution. Population growth may be exponential or logistic. The age-sex structure of a population affects the rate of population growth. 
An ionic crystal lattice breaks apart when it is dissolved in water. Dissociation is the separation of ions that occurs when a solid ionic compound dissolves. It is important to be able to write dissociation equations. Simply undo the crisscross method that you learned when writing chemical formulas of ionic compounds. The subscripts for the ions in the chemical formulas become the coefficients of the respective ions on the product side of the equation. Shown below are dissociation equations for NaCl, Ca(NO 3 ) 2 , and (NH 4 ) 3 PO 4 . 
Scientists have long wanted to find the most basic building blocks of the universe. They asked, “what are the fundamental particles of matter that cannot be subdivided into smaller, simpler particles,” and “what holds these particles together?” The quest for fundamental particles began thousands of years ago. Scientists thought they had finally found them when John Dalton discovered the atom in 1803 (see the timeline in Table below ). The word atom means “indivisible,” and Dalton thought that the atom could not be divided into smaller, simpler particles. 
Air pollution is harmful to human beings and other living things. About 22 million people die from air pollution each year. Breathing polluted air increases the risk of developing lung diseases such as asthma and lung cancer. Breathing bad air also increases the chances of dying from other diseases. Children are most likely to be affected by air pollution. That’s because their lungs are still developing and growing. Children also take in more air for their size than adults do. Some air pollutants damage the environment as well as the health of living things. The type of damage depends on the pollutant. Air pollution can also harm the environment. 
The phagocytes that are part of the body’s second line of defense attack any pathogens they encounter. They provide a general defense. Some white blood cells attack only certain pathogens. They provide a specific defense. 
Male Urethra The male urethra passes through the prostate gland immediately inferior to the bladder before passing below the pubic symphysis (see Figure 25.3b). The length of the male urethra varies between men but averages 20 cm in length. It is divided into four regions: the preprostatic urethra, the prostatic urethra, the membranous urethra, and the spongy or penile urethra. The preprostatic urethra is very short and incorporated into the bladder wall. The prostatic urethra passes through the prostate gland. During sexual intercourse, it receives sperm via the ejaculatory ducts and secretions from the seminal vesicles. Paired Cowper’s glands (bulbourethral glands) produce and secrete mucus into the urethra to buffer urethral pH during sexual stimulation. The mucus neutralizes the usually acidic environment and lubricates the urethra, decreasing the resistance to ejaculation. The membranous urethra passes through the deep muscles of the perineum, where it is invested by the overlying urethral sphincters. The spongy urethra exits at the tip (external urethral orifice) of the penis after passing through the corpus spongiosum. Mucous glands are found along much of the length of the urethra and protect the urethra from extremes of urine pH. Innervation is the same in both males and females. 
Another example of habituation is shown below ( Figure below ). Crows and most other birds are usually afraid of people. They avoid coming close to people, or they fly away when people come near them. The crows landing on this scarecrow have become used to a “human” in this place. They have learned that the scarecrow poses no danger. They are no longer afraid to come close. They have become habituated to the scarecrow. 
After spermatids form, they move into the epididymis to mature into sperm, like the one shown in Figure below . The spermatids grow a tail and lose excess cytoplasm from the head. When a sperm is mature, the tail can rotate like a propeller, so the sperm can propel itself forward. Mitochondria in the connecting piece produce the energy (ATP) needed for movement. The head of the mature sperm consists mainly of the nucleus, which carries copies of the father’s chromosomes. The part of the head called the acrosome produces enzymes that help the sperm head penetrate an egg. 
Temperature does not change during a phase change. The process of a liquid becoming a gas is called boiling; the process of a solid becoming a gas is called sublimation. 
Archaeplastida Red algae and green algae are included in the supergroup Archaeplastida. It was from a common ancestor of these protists that the land plants evolved, since their closest relatives are found in this group. Molecular evidence supports that all Archaeplastida are descendents of an endosymbiotic relationship between a heterotrophic protist and a cyanobacterium. The red and green algae include unicellular, multicellular, and colonial forms. Red Algae Red algae, or rhodophytes, are primarily multicellular, lack flagella, and range in size from microscopic, unicellular protists to large, multicellular forms grouped into the informal seaweed category. The red algae life cycle is an alternation of generations. Some species of red algae contain phycoerythrins, photosynthetic accessory pigments that are red in color and. 
Bacteria provide vital ecosystem services. They are important decomposers. They are also needed for the carbon and nitrogen cycles. There are billions of bacteria inside the human intestines. They help digest food, make vitamins, and play other important roles. Humans also use bacteria in many other ways, including:. 
CHAPTER REVIEW 20.1 Structure and Function of Blood Vessels Blood pumped by the heart flows through a series of vessels known as arteries, arterioles, capillaries, venules, and veins before returning to the heart. Arteries transport blood away from the heart and branch into smaller vessels, forming arterioles. Arterioles distribute blood to capillary beds, the sites of exchange with the body tissues. Capillaries lead back to small vessels known as venules that flow into the larger veins and eventually back to the heart. The arterial system is a relatively high-pressure system, so arteries have thick walls that appear round in cross section. The venous system is a lower-pressure system, containing veins that have larger lumens and thinner walls. They often appear flattened. Arteries, arterioles, venules, and veins are composed of three tunics known as the tunica intima, tunica media, and tunica externa. Capillaries have only a tunica intima layer. The tunica intima is a thin layer composed of a simple squamous epithelium known as endothelium and a small amount of connective tissue. The tunica media is a thicker area composed of variable amounts of smooth muscle and connective tissue. It is the thickest layer in all but the largest arteries. The tunica externa is primarily a layer of connective tissue, although in veins, it also contains some smooth muscle. Blood flow through vessels can be dramatically influenced by vasoconstriction and vasodilation in their walls. 
Not every neutron produced by fission induces fission. Some neutrons escape the fissionable material, while others interact with a nucleus without making it fission. We can enhance the number of fissions produced by neutrons by having a large amount of fissionable material. The minimum amount necessary for self-sustained fission of a given nuclide is called its critical mass. 
Elastic rebound occurs when materials return to their original shape. 
Mammals may be herbivores, carnivores, or omnivores. Some carnivore mammals eat mainly insects and are called insectivores. Some omnivore mammals eat mainly fruits and are called frugivores. 
The sunlight that reaches Earth is the planet’s most important source of energy. The energy in sunlight, called solar energy, is electromagnetic energy. This is a form of energy that travels through space in electric and magnetic waves. Solar energy can be used to heat homes and produce electricity in solar cells like those on the roof seen in the Figure below . Sunny areas receive plenty of sunlight to generate electricity, but solar energy may not be practical in areas that are often cloudy. 
Elongation is the addition of nucleotides to the mRNA strand. RNA polymerase reads the unwound DNA strand and builds the mRNA molecule, using complementary base pairs. There is a brief time during this process when the newly formed RNA is bound to the unwound DNA. During this process, an adenine (A) in the DNA binds to an uracil (U) in the RNA. 
The genetic code is the same in all living things. This shows that all organisms are related by descent from a common ancestor. 
Organs of the GI tract are covered by muscles that contract to keep food moving along. A series of involuntary muscle contractions moves rapidly along the tract, like a wave travelling through a spring toy. The muscle contractions are called peristalsis. The diagram in Figure below shows how peristalsis works. 
Hookworms, such as Ancyclostoma and Necator, infest the intestines and feed on the blood of mammals, especially in dogs, cats, and humans. Trichina worms (Trichinella) are the causal organism of trichinosis in humans, often resulting from the consumption of undercooked pork; Trichinella can infect other mammalian hosts as well. Ascaris, a large intestinal roundworm, steals nutrition from its human host and may create physical blockage of the intestines. The filarial worms, such as Dirofilaria and Wuchereria, are commonly vectored by mosquitoes, which pass the infective agents among mammals through their blood-sucking activity. Dirofilaria immitis, a blood-infective parasite, is the notorious dog heartworm species. Wuchereria bancrofti infects the lymph nodes of humans, resulting in the non-lethal but deforming condition called elephantiasis, in which parts of the body become swelled to gigantic proportions due to obstruction of lymphatic drainage and inflammation of lymphatic tissues. 
External Fertilization External fertilization usually occurs in aquatic environments where both eggs and sperm are released into the water. After the sperm reaches the egg, fertilization takes place. Most external fertilization happens during the process of spawning where one or several females release their eggs and the male(s) release sperm in the same area, at the same time. The release. 
An inclined plane is a simple machine consisting of a sloping surface that connects lower and higher elevations. The ideal mechanical advantage of an inclined plane is always greater than 1. 
You can reduce your risk of developing cancer by staying away from certain hazards. For example, the use of tanning beds can lead to skin cancer. 
Oxygen is needed to make ozone. Ozone is a molecule made of three oxygen ions. Ozone in the upper atmosphere blocks harmful solar radiation from reaching the surface. Without oxygen, life on Earth would have been very simple. 
Birds reproduce sexually and have separates sexes. Fertilization occurs internally, so males and females must mate. Many bird species have special behaviors, such as unique songs or visual displays, for attracting mates. These special behaviors are called courtship. The white peacock in Figure below is putting on a stunning display of his amazing tail feathers to court a mate. 
Physical science is the study of matter and energy. It includes chemistry and physics. 
which is identical to the Rydberg equation for R ∞ = k . When Bohr calculated his theoretical value for the hc Rydberg constant, R ∞, and compared it with the experimentally accepted value, he got excellent agreement. Since the Rydberg constant was one of the most precisely measured constants at that time, this level of agreement was astonishing and meant that Bohr’s model was taken seriously, despite the many assumptions that Bohr needed to derive it. The lowest few energy levels are shown in Figure 6.14. One of the fundamental laws of physics is that matter is most stable with the lowest possible energy. Thus, the electron in a hydrogen atom usually moves in the n = 1 orbit, the orbit in which it has the lowest energy. When the electron is in this lowest energy orbit, the atom is said to be in its ground electronic state (or simply ground state). If the atom receives energy from an outside source, it is possible for the electron to move to an orbit with a higher n value and the atom is now in an excited electronic state (or simply an excited state) with a higher energy. When an electron transitions from an excited state (higher energy orbit) to a less excited state, or ground state, the difference in energy is emitted as a photon. Similarly, if a photon is absorbed by an atom, the energy of the photon moves an electron from a lower energy orbit up to a more excited one. We can relate the energy of electrons in atoms to what we learned previously about energy. The law of conservation of energy says that we can neither create nor destroy energy. Thus, if a certain amount of external energy is required to excite an electron from one energy level to another, that same amount of energy will be liberated when the electron returns to its initial state (Figure 6.15). In effect, an atom can “store” energy by using it to promote an electron to a state with a higher energy and release it when the electron returns to a lower state. The energy can be released as one quantum of energy, as the electron returns to its ground state (say, from n = 5 to n = 1), or it can be released as two or more smaller quanta as the electron falls to an intermediate state, then to the ground state (say, from n = 5 to n = 4, emitting one quantum, then to n = 1, emitting a second quantum). Since Bohr’s model involved only a single electron, it could also be applied to the single electron ions He+, Li2+, Be3+, and so forth, which differ from hydrogen only in their nuclear charges, and so one-electron atoms and ions are collectively referred to as hydrogen-like atoms. The energy expression for hydrogen-like atoms is a generalization of the hydrogen atom energy, in which Z is the nuclear charge (+1 for hydrogen, +2 for He, +3 for Li, and so on) and k has a value of 2.179 × 10–18 J. E n = − kZ2 n. 
The nitrogen cycle moves nitrogen back and forth between the atmosphere and organisms. Bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrogen compounds that plants can absorb. Other bacteria change nitrogen compounds back to nitrogen gas, which re-enters the atmosphere. 
The majority of mollusks and annelids live in the water or inside hosts. Arthropods are invertebrates that include insects. The majority of arthropods live on land. 
There is a lot of volcanic activity at divergent plate boundaries in the oceans. As the plates pull away from each other, they create deep fissures. Molten lava erupts through these cracks. The East Pacific Rise is a divergent plate boundary in the Pacific Ocean ( Figure below ). The Mid-Atlantic Ridge is a divergent plate boundary in the Atlantic Ocean. 
Saturated hydrocarbons have only single bonds between carbon atoms, so the carbon atoms are bonded to as many hydrogen atoms as possible. In other words, they are saturated with hydrogen atoms. 
Freshwater below Earth’s surface is called groundwater . The water infiltrates, or seeps down into, the ground from the surface. How does this happen? And where does the water go?. 
8.2 | The Light-Dependent Reactions of Photosynthesis By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain how plants absorb energy from sunlight • Describe short and long wavelengths of light • Describe how and where photosynthesis takes place within a plant How can light be used to make food? When a person turns on a lamp, electrical energy becomes light energy. Like all other forms of kinetic energy, light can travel, change form, and be harnessed to do work. In the case of photosynthesis, light energy is converted into chemical energy, which photoautotrophs use to build carbohydrate molecules (Figure 8.9). However, autotrophs only use a few specific components of sunlight. 
Distance Although displacement is described in terms of direction, distance is not. Distance is defined to be the magnitude or size of displacement between two positions. Note that the distance between two positions is not the same as the distance traveled between them. Distance traveled is the total length of the path traveled between two positions. Distance has no direction and, thus, no sign. For example, the distance the professor walks is 2.0 m. The distance the airplane passenger walks is 4.0 m. Misconception Alert: Distance Traveled vs. Magnitude of Displacement It is important to note that the distance traveled, however, can be greater than the magnitude of the displacement (by magnitude, we mean just the size of the displacement without regard to its direction; that is, just a number with a unit). For example, the professor could pace back and forth many times, perhaps walking a distance of 150 m during a lecture, yet still end up only 2.0 m to the right of her starting point. In this case her displacement would be +2.0 m, the magnitude of her displacement would be 2.0 m, but the distance she traveled would be 150 m. In kinematics we nearly always deal with displacement and magnitude of displacement, and almost never with distance traveled. One way to think about this is to assume you marked the start of the motion and the end of the motion. The displacement is simply the difference in the position of the two marks and is independent of the path taken in traveling between the two marks. The distance traveled, however, is the total length of the path taken between the two marks. 
The order of bases in nucleic acids is highly significant. The bases are like the letters of a four-letter alphabet. These "letters" can be combined to form "words. " Groups of three bases form words of the genetic code . Each code word, called a codon, stands for a different amino acid. A series of many codons spells out the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide or protein ( Figure below ). In short, nucleic acids contain the information needed for cells to make proteins. This information is passed from a body cell to its daughter cells when the cell divides. It is also passed from parents to their offspring when organisms reproduce. 
Cell division is just one of the stages that a cell goes through during its lifetime. All of the stages that a cell goes through make up the cell cycle . 
Phototrophs are organisms that capture light energy and convert it to chemical energy inside their cell. Most phototrophs are the autotrophs that perform photosynthesis, which are also known as photoautotrophs. These organisms have the ability to fix carbon from carbon dioxide into organic compounds, such as glucose. Chemotrophs , on the other hand, do not get their energy from carbon. These are organisms that break down either organic or inorganic molecules to supply energy for the cell through chemosynthesis. Chemotrophs can be either autotrophic (chemoautotrophs) or heterotrophic (chemoheterotrophs). Chemoautotrophs derive their energy from chemical reactions, and synthesize all necessary organic compounds from carbon dioxide. Chemoheterotrophs are unable to fix carbon to form their own organic compounds. The various types of metabolisms are discussed in the Prokaryotes: Nutrition and Metabolism (Advanced) concept. 
One example is type 1 diabetes . In this disease, the immune system attacks cells of the pancreas. Other examples are multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. In multiple sclerosis , the immune system attacks nerve cells. This causes weakness and pain. In rheumatoid arthritis , the immune system attacks the cells of joints. This causes joint damage and pain. 
A third important type of soil is laterite . Laterite forms in tropical areas. Temperatures are warm and rain falls every day ( Figure below ). So much rain falls that chemical weathering is intense. All soluble minerals are washed from the soil. Plant nutrients get carried away. There is practically no humus. Laterite soils are often red in color from the iron oxides. If laterites are exposed to the Sun, they bake as hard as a brick. 
The rise in greenhouse gases due to human actions is too much of a good thing. It increases the greenhouse effect and causes Earth’s average temperature to rise. Rising global temperatures, in turn, are melting polar ice caps and glaciers. Figure below shows how much smaller the Arctic ice cap was in 2012 than it was in 1984. With more liquid water on Earth’s surface, sea levels are rising. 
When plates are pushed or pulled, the rock is subjected to stress. Stress can cause a rock to change shape or to break. When a rock bends without breaking, it folds. When the rock breaks, it fractures. Mountain building and earthquakes are some of the responses rocks have to stress. 
Tubeworms deep in the Galapagos Rift get their energy from chemosynthetic bacteria. Tubeworms have no mouth, eyes, or stomach. Their survival depends on a symbiotic relationship with the billions of bacteria that live inside them. These bacteria convert the chemicals that shoot out of the hydrothermal vents into food for the worm. 
Health care has been improving over the most recent centuries. Vaccines were developed that could prevent many diseases ( Figure below ). Antibiotics were discovered that could cure most infections caused by bacteria. Together, these two advances saved countless lives. 
Carbon behaves as a metal because it conducts heat and electricity well. It is a nonmetal because it is black and brittle and cannot be made into sheets or wires. 
Like hurricanes, winter storms develop from cyclones. But in the case of winter storms, the cyclones form at higher latitudes. In North America, cyclones often form when the jet stream dips south in the winter. This lets dry polar air pour south. At the same time, warm moist air from the Gulf of Mexico flows north. When the two air masses meet, the differences in temperature and pressure cause strong winds and heavy precipitation. Blizzards and lake-effect snow storms are two types of winter storms that occur in the U. S. 
The Cerebrum The iconic gray mantle of the human brain, which appears to make up most of the mass of the brain, is the cerebrum (Figure 13.6). The wrinkled portion is the cerebral cortex, and the rest of the structure is beneath that outer covering. There is a large separation between the two sides of the cerebrum called the longitudinal fissure. It separates the cerebrum into two distinct halves, a right and left cerebral hemisphere. Deep within the cerebrum, the white matter of the corpus callosum provides the major pathway for communication between the two hemispheres of the cerebral cortex. 
A transverse wave is characterized by the high and low points reached by particles of the medium as the wave passes through. The high points are called crests, and the low points are called troughs. You can see both in the Figure below . 
Chemical symbols are useful to concisely represent the elements present in a substance. The letters usually come from the name of the element. 
The carbonyl group, a carbon-to-oxygen double bond, is the defining feature ofaldehydes and ketones. In aldehydes at least one bond on the carbonyl group is a carbon-to-hydrogen bond; in ketones, both available bonds on the carbonyl carbon atom are carbon-to-carbon bonds. Aldehydes are synthesized by the oxidation of primary alcohols. The aldehyde can be further oxidized to a carboxylic acid. Ketones are prepared by the oxidation of secondary alcohols. Mild oxidizing agents oxidize aldehydes to carboxylic acids. Ketones are not oxidized by these reagents. A thiol is a compound with an SH functional group. 
Darwin coined the term fitness to refer to an organism’s relative ability to survive and produce fertile offspring. Nature selects the variations that are most useful. Therefore, he called this type of selection natural selection. 
All scientific explanations and interpretations are based on facts. 
The sense of taste is controlled by sensory neurons on the tongue. They are grouped in bundles called taste buds. You can see taste buds on the tongue in Figure below . Taste neurons sense chemicals in food. They can detect five different tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami, which is a meaty taste. When taste neurons sense chemicals, they send messages to the brain about them. The brain then decides what you are tasting. 
The atmosphere is a mixture of gases that surrounds the planet. We also call it air. The gases in the atmosphere include nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon dioxide. Along with water vapor, the atmosphere allows life to survive. Without it, Earth would be a harsh, barren world. 
Metabolism and Obesity Obesity in the United States is epidemic. The rate of obesity has been steadily rising since the 1980s. In the 1990s, most states reported that less than 10 percent of their populations was obese, and the state with the highest rate reported that only 15 percent of their population was considered obese. By 2010, the U. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported that nearly 36 percent of adults over 20 years old were obese and an additional 33 percent were overweight, leaving only about 30 percent of the population at a healthy weight. These studies find the highest levels of obesity are concentrated in the southern states. They also find the level of childhood obesity is rising. Obesity is defined by the body mass index (BMI), which is a measure of an individual’s weight-to-height ratio. The normal, or healthy, BMI range is between 18 and 24.9 kg/m2. Overweight is defined as a BMI of 25 to 29.9 kg/m2, and obesity is considered to be a BMI greater than 30 kg/m2. Obesity can arise from a number of factors, including overeating, poor diet, sedentary lifestyle, limited sleep, genetic factors, and even diseases or drugs. Severe obesity (morbid obesity) or long-term obesity can result in serious medical conditions, including coronary heart disease; type 2 diabetes; endometrial, breast, or colon cancer; hypertension (high blood pressure); dyslipidemia (high cholesterol or elevated triglycerides); stroke; liver disease; gall bladder disease; sleep apnea or respiratory diseases; osteoarthritis; and infertility. Research has shown that losing weight can help reduce or reverse the complications associated with these conditions. 
The explosion of nitroglycerin releases large volumes of gases and is very exothermic. 
Waterfowl are birds that live on the water. These include ducks, geese, swans, and pelicans, to name a few. Landfowl are ground-feeding birds such as chickens and turkeys. Penguins are a group of flightless birds adapted for life in the water with flippers. Diurnal raptors are birds of prey that hunt during the day. These include falcons, eagles and hawks. Nocturnal raptors hunt during the night. These include various types of owls. Parrots are brightly colored and very intelligent. They are found in the tropics and include cockatoos, parrots, and parakeets. 
Plants have eukaryotic cells with large central vacuoles, cell walls containing cellulose, and plastids such as chloroplasts and chromoplasts. Different types of plant cells include parenchymal, collenchymal, and sclerenchymal cells. The three types differ in structure and function. 
The majority of amphibian species go through a larval stage that is very different from the adult form, as you can see from the frog in Figure below . The early larval, or tadpole , stage resembles a fish. It lacks legs and has a long tail, which it uses to swim. The tadpole also has gills to absorb oxygen from water. As the larva undergoes metamorphosis , it grows legs, loses its tail, and develops lungs. These changes prepare it for life on land as an adult frog. 
2Al(s) + Fe2O3(s) → 2Fe(s) + Al2O3(s) + heat to indicate that heat is one of the products. Chemical equations in which heat is shown as either a reactant or a product are called thermochemical equations. In this reaction, the system consists of aluminum, iron, and oxygen atoms; everything else, including the container, makes up the surroundings. During the reaction, so much heat is produced that the iron liquefies. Eventually, the system cools; the iron solidifies as heat is transferred to the surroundings. A process in which heat (q) is transferred from a system to its surroundings is described as exothermic. By convention, q < 0 for an exothermic reaction. 
symbiotic relationship in which one species benefits while the other species is harmed. 
Gastrulation The typical blastula is a ball of cells. The next stage in embryonic development is the formation of the body plan. The cells in the blastula rearrange themselves spatially to form three layers of cells. This process is called gastrulation. During gastrulation, the blastula folds upon itself to form the three layers of cells. Each of these layers is called a germ layer and each germ layer differentiates into different organ systems. The three germs layers, shown in Figure 43.26, are the endoderm, the ectoderm, and the mesoderm. The ectoderm gives rise to the nervous system and the epidermis. The mesoderm gives rise to the muscle cells and connective tissue in the body. The endoderm gives rise to columnar cells found in the digestive system and many internal organs. 
Organisms can use different strategies to increase their reproduction rate. Altricial organisms are helpless at birth, and their parents give them a lot of care. This care is often seen in bird species. ( Figure below ). Altricial birds are usually born blind and without feathers. Compared to precocial organisms, altricial organisms have a longer period of development before they reach maturity. Precocial organisms, such as the geese shown below, can take care of themselves at birth and do not require help from their parents ( Figure below ). In order to reproduce as much as possible, altricial and precocial organisms must use very different strategies. 
The halogen group is quite diverse. It includes elements that occur in three different states of matter at room temperature. Fluorine and chlorine are gases, bromine is a liquid, and iodine and astatine are solids. Halogens also vary in color, as you can see in the Figure below . Fluorine and chlorine are green, bromine is red, and iodine and astatine are nearly black. Like other nonmetals, halogens cannot conduct electricity or heat. Compared with most other elements, halogens have relatively low melting and boiling points. You can watch a lab demonstration of the melting and boiling points of halogens at this URL: http://www. youtube. com/watch?v=yP0U5rGWqdg . 
The increase in electrons across the periodic table explains why elements go from metals to metalloids and then to nonmetals from left to right across the table. Look at period 2 in Figure below as an example. Lithium (Li) is a metal, boron (B) a metalloid, and fluorine (F) and neon (Ne) are nonmetals. The inner energy level is full for all four elements. This level has just one orbital and can hold a maximum of two electrons. The outer energy level is a different story. This level has four orbitals and can hold a maximum of eight electrons. Lithium has just one electron in this level, boron has three, fluorine has seven, and neon has eight. 
Gene transcription is controlled by regulatory proteins that bind to regulatory elements on DNA. The proteins usually either activate or repress transcription. 
Fibrous root systems have many small branching roots, called fibrous roots , but no large primary root. The huge number of threadlike roots increases the surface area for absorption of water and minerals, but fibrous roots anchor the plant less securely. 
In the lungs, oxygen diffuses out of the alveoli and into the capillaries surrounding the alveoli. Oxygen (about 98 percent) binds reversibly to the respiratory pigment hemoglobin found in red blood cells (RBCs). RBCs carry oxygen to the tissues where oxygen dissociates from the hemoglobin and diffuses into the cells of the tissues. More specifically, alveolar P O 2. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 31.1 Nutritional Requirements of Plants Plants can absorb inorganic nutrients and water through their root system, and carbon dioxide from the environment. The combination of organic compounds, along with water, carbon dioxide, and sunlight, produce the energy that allows plants to grow. Inorganic compounds form the majority of the soil solution. Plants access water though the soil. Water is absorbed by the plant root, transports nutrients throughout the plant, and maintains the structure of the plant. Essential elements are indispensable elements for plant growth. They are divided into macronutrients and micronutrients. The macronutrients plants require are carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulfur. Important micronutrients include iron, manganese, boron, molybdenum, copper, zinc, chlorine, nickel, cobalt, silicon and sodium. 
Defecating, urination, and even childbirth involve cooperation between the diaphragm and abdominal muscles (this cooperation is referred to as the “Valsalva maneuver”). You hold your breath by a steady contraction of the diaphragm; this stabilizes the volume and pressure of the peritoneal cavity. When the abdominal muscles contract, the pressure cannot push the diaphragm up, so it increases pressure on the intestinal tract (defecation), urinary tract (urination), or reproductive tract (childbirth). The inferior surface of the pericardial sac and the inferior surfaces of the pleural membranes (parietal pleura) fuse onto the central tendon of the diaphragm. To the sides of the tendon are the skeletal muscle portions of the diaphragm, which insert into the tendon while having a number of origins including the xiphoid process of the sternum anteriorly, the inferior six ribs and their cartilages laterally, and the lumbar vertebrae and 12th ribs posteriorly. The diaphragm also includes three openings for the passage of structures between the thorax and the abdomen. The inferior vena cava passes through the caval opening, and the esophagus and attached nerves pass through the esophageal hiatus. The aorta, thoracic duct, and azygous vein pass through the aortic hiatus of the posterior diaphragm. 
The ilium is the fan-like, superior region that forms the largest part of the hip bone. It is firmly united to the sacrum at the largely immobile sacroiliac joint (see Figure 8.12). The ischium forms the posteroinferior region of each hip bone. It supports the body when sitting. The pubis forms the anterior portion of the hip bone. The pubis curves medially, where it joins to the pubis of the opposite hip bone at a specialized joint called the pubic symphysis. 
Figure 23.28 Digestion and Absorption Digestion begins in the mouth and continues as food travels through the small intestine. Most absorption occurs in the small intestine. 
Define diffusion and effusion and how they relate to other properties of gases. 
Polymers are a pervasive part of modern life. It is very likely that at least some part of your clothing is made of nylon, rayon, or polyester. The milk or juice that you have for breakfast often comes in a polyethylene container. If you don’t have breakfast at home, you might get coffee from a fast food establishment, where your order is delivered to you in a Styrofoam® container. While getting out of your car, you bang the door on another vehicle. One reason you may not have dented the door is the fact that it could be made out of a polymeric plastic material that resists deformation more than simple metallic structures. Elsewhere on your car, both synthetic and natural rubber are probably present in the tires. All these materials are examples of organic polymers. 
The alkaline earth metals include beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, and barium. Strontium and barium react with air and must be stored in oil. 
When iron filings and sulfur powder are mixed together in any ratio, they form a mixture. No chemical reaction occurs, and both elements retain their individual properties. A magnet can be used to mechanically separate the two elements by attracting the iron filings out of the mixture and leaving the sulfur behind. 
Some mollusks, such as oysters and scallops, are important food sources. 
Terrestrial biomes are classified by the climate and their biodiversity , especially the types of primary producers . The world map in Figure below shows where 13 major terrestrial biomes are found. 
The warm air at the cold front rises and creates a low pressure cell. Winds rush into the low pressure. This creates a rising column of air. The air twists, rotating counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere. Since the rising air is moist, rain or snow falls. 
Fission Occurs when a parent cell splits into two identical daughter cells of the same size. Bacteria, Protists, Unicellular Fungi. 
Scientists may publish articles about their research in peer-reviewed science journals. Peer review means that the work is analyzed by peers, in other words, by other scientists. The articles are published only if the other scientists are convinced that the research is accurate and honest. 
Salts of Weak Bases and Strong Acids When we neutralize a weak base with a strong acid, the product is a salt containing the conjugate acid of the weak base. This conjugate acid is a weak acid. For example, ammonium chloride, NH4Cl, is a salt formed by the reaction of the weak base ammonia with the strong acid HCl: NH 3(aq) + HCl(aq) ⟶ NH 4 Cl(aq) A solution of this salt contains ammonium ions and chloride ions. The chloride ion has no effect on the acidity of the solution since HCl is a strong acid. Chloride is a very weak base and will not accept a proton to a measurable extent. However, the ammonium ion, the conjugate acid of ammonia, reacts with water and increases the hydronium ion concentration: NH 4 +(aq) + H 2 O(l) ⇌ H 3 O +(aq) + NH 3(aq) The equilibrium equation for this reaction is simply the ionization constant. Ka, for the acid NH 4 + :. 
The stars that make up a constellation appear close to each other from Earth. In reality, they may be very distant from one another. Constellations were important to people, like the Ancient Greeks. People who spent a lot of time outdoors at night, like shepherds, named the constellations. They told stories about them. Pictured below is one of the most easily recognized constellations ( Figure below ). The ancient Greeks thought this group of stars looked like a hunter. They named it Orion, after a great hunter in Greek mythology. 
2.2 | Chemical Bonds By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain the relationship between molecules and compounds • Distinguish between ions, cations, and anions • Identify the key difference between ionic and covalent bonds • Distinguish between nonpolar and polar covalent bonds • Explain how water molecules link via hydrogen bonds Atoms separated by a great distance cannot link; rather, they must come close enough for the electrons in their valence shells to interact. But do atoms ever actually touch one another? Most physicists would say no, because the negatively charged electrons in their valence shells repel one another. No force within the human body—or anywhere in the natural world—is strong enough to overcome this electrical repulsion. So when you read about atoms linking together or colliding, bear in mind that the atoms are not merging in a physical sense. Instead, atoms link by forming a chemical bond. A bond is a weak or strong electrical attraction that holds atoms in the same vicinity. The new grouping is typically more stable—less likely to react again—than its component atoms were when they were separate. A more or less stable grouping of two or more atoms held together by chemical bonds is called a molecule. The bonded atoms may be of the same element, as in the case of H2, which is called molecular hydrogen or hydrogen gas. When a molecule is made up of two or more atoms of different elements, it is called a chemical compound. Thus, a unit of water, or H2O, is a compound, as is a single molecule of the gas methane, or CH4. Three types of chemical bonds are important in human physiology, because they hold together substances that are used by the body for critical aspects of homeostasis, signaling, and energy production, to name just a few important processes. These are ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and hydrogen bonds. 
In multicellular organisms, specialized cells may be organized into tissues. Tissues may be organized into organs, and organs may be organized into organ systems. Organ systems work together to carry out all the functions of the whole organism. 
Visible light is one type of electromagnetic radiation , which is a form of energy that exhibits wavelike behavior as it moves through space. Other types of electromagnetic radiation include gamma rays, x-rays, ultraviolet light, infrared light, microwaves, and radio waves. The figure below shows the electromagnetic spectrum , which is all forms of electromagnetic radiation. Notice that visible light makes up only a very, very small portion of the entire electromagnetic spectrum. All electromagnetic radiation moves through a vacuum at a constant speed of 2.998 × 10 8 m/s. While the presence of air molecules slows the speed of light by a very small amount, we will use the value of 3.00 × 10 8 m/s as the speed of light in air. 
Quantum numbers specify the arrangements of electrons in orbitals. 
All of the outer planets have numerous moons. They also have planetary rings made of dust and other small particles. Only the rings of Saturn can be easily seen from Earth. 
Anaerobic prokaryotes do not need oxygen. They use fermentation or other methods of respiration that don’t require oxygen. In fact, some cannot tolerate oxygen. An example is a bacterium that infects wounds and kills tissues, causing a condition called gangrene. 
Fluoride ion is widely used in water supplies to help prevent tooth decay. Chloride is an important component in ion balance in blood. Iodide ion is needed by the thyroid gland to make the hormone thyroxine. 
Shock Hazards Electrical currents through people produce tremendously varied effects. An electrical current can be used to block back pain. The possibility of using electrical current to stimulate muscle action in paralyzed limbs, perhaps allowing paraplegics to walk, is under study. TV dramatizations in which electrical shocks are used to bring a heart attack victim out of ventricular fibrillation (a massively irregular, often fatal, beating of the heart) are more than common. Yet most electrical shock fatalities occur because a current put the heart into fibrillation. A pacemaker uses electrical shocks to stimulate the heart to beat properly. Some fatal shocks do not produce burns, but warts can be safely burned off with electric current (though freezing using liquid nitrogen is now more common). Of course, there are consistent explanations for these disparate effects. The major factors upon which the effects of electrical shock depend are 1. The amount of current. 
Yes and no. Bacteria cells are similar to our cells in some ways. Like our cells, bacteria cells have DNA and a plasma membrane. But bacteria are unique in other ways. They are called prokaryotic cells because of these differences. 
A: Any element in group 1 has just one valence electron. Examples include hydrogen (H), lithium (Li), and sodium (Na). Any element in group 18 has eight valence electrons (except for helium, which has a total of just two electrons). Examples include neon (Ne), argon (Ar), and krypton (Kr). Oxygen, like all the other elements in group 16, has six valence electrons. 
The outer planets are made of hydrogen and helium, so they are called gas giants. 
Fermented Foods. Fermentation is a type of respiration that doesn’t use oxygen. Fermentation by bacteria is used in brewing and baking. It is also used to make the foods pictured here. 
The lithosphere is composed of both the crust and the uppermost mantle. The lithosphere is a brittle, rigid solid. It is easily cracked or broken. 
deep sea trenches : Trenches are found in the sea. Some are near the edges of continents. Trenches are found near chains of active volcanoes. An example is the line of the very deepest blue, off of western South America. 
Rutherford’s experiment showed that the vast majority of the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus, which is composed of protons and neutrons. The mass of an electron is very small compared to the mass of a neutron or proton, so the electrons in an element do not contribute much to the total mass. The mass number is defined as the total number of protons and neutrons in an atom. Remember that both protons and neutrons have a mass of approximately 1 amu. Knowing the mass number and the atomic number of an atom therefore allows you to determine the number of neutrons present in that atom by subtraction:. 
Natural selection for a polygenic trait changes the distribution of phenotypes. It may have a stabilizing, directional, or disruptive effect on the phenotype distribution. 
These people may be having fun in the icy water, but their bodies are struggling to react to the cold. For example, they may begin to shiver. Shivering helps the body return to a stable temperature. The body is always working to achieve stability, or homeostasis. 
Amphibians are ectothermic vertebrates that divide their time between freshwater and terrestrial habitats. They are the first true tetrapods, or vertebrates with four limbs. Amphibians breathe with gills as larvae and with lungs as adults. They have a three-chambered heart and relatively complex nervous system. 
Fossils may form in other ways. With complete preservation, the organism doesn't change much. As pictured below ( Figure below ), tree sap may cover an organism and then turn into amber . The original organism is preserved so that scientists might be able to study its DNA. Organisms can also be completely preserved in tar or ice. 
Cellulose is composed of very long strands of glucose monomers that are hydrogen bonded to one another. Cellulose is largely indigestible and comprises the cell walls of plants. 
Newton’s second law of motion explains the weight of objects. Weight is a measure of the force of gravity pulling on an object of a given mass. It’s the force (F) in the acceleration equation that was introduced above:. 
Scientists have learned a lot about the ocean floor. For example, they know that Earth’s tallest mountains and deepest canyons are on the ocean floor. The major features on the ocean floor are described below. They are also shown in Figure below . 
Rock bands often use special stage effects, like the fake fog in this picture. Real fog forms when water vapor in the air condenses into tiny droplets of water. The fake fog shown here formed when solid carbon dioxide changed directly to carbon dioxide gas. 
The protist wraps around its prey, which is usually bacteria. 
Homologous chromosomes form a pair, one from each parent. Homologous chromosomes are similar in size and shape, and contain the same genes, though they may have different alleles. Alleles are alternative forms of the same gene. This diagram represents two pairs of homologous chromosomes. 
Most of the visible light on Earth comes from the sun. The sun and other stars produce light because they are so hot. They glow with light due to their extremely high temperatures. This way of producing light is called incandescence . Incandescent light bulbs also produce light in this way. When electric current passes through a wire filament inside an incandescent bulb, the wire gets so hot that it glows. Do you see the glowing filament inside the incandescent light bulb in the Figure below ?. 
Arterioles diverge into capillary beds. Capillary beds contain a large number (10 to 100) of capillaries that branch among the cells and tissues of the body. Capillaries are narrow-diameter tubes that can fit red blood cells through in single file and are the sites for the exchange of nutrients, waste, and oxygen with tissues at the cellular level. Fluid also crosses into the interstitial space from the capillaries. The capillaries converge again into venules that connect to minor veins that finally connect to major veins that take blood high in carbon dioxide back to the heart. Veins are blood vessels that bring blood back to the heart. The major veins drain blood from the same organs and limbs that the major arteries supply. Fluid is also brought back to the heart via the lymphatic system. 
Stars spend most of their lives on the main sequence, fusing hydrogen into helium. 
Figure 18.13 The honeycreeper birds illustrate adaptive radiation. From one original species of bird, multiple others evolved, each with its own distinctive characteristics. 
Macroevolution refers to much bigger evolutionary changes that result in new species. Macroevolution may happen:. 
When glass breaks, its physical properties change. Instead of one solid sheet of glass, it now has holes and cracks. 
Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain at least one double or triple bond between carbon atoms. As a result, the carbon atoms are unable to bond with as many hydrogen atoms as they would if they were joined only by single bonds. This makes them unsaturated with hydrogen. Unsaturated hydrocarbons are classified on the basis of their bonds as alkenes, alkynes, or aromatic hydrocarbons. 
Compare fractures and faults and define how they are related to earthquakes. 
A spectrometer produces a spectrum from starlight. Astronomers can learn a lot about a star by studying its spectrum. 
24.3 Lipid Metabolism Lipids are available to the body from three sources. They can be ingested in the diet, stored in the adipose tissue of the body, or synthesized in the liver. Fats ingested in the diet are digested in the small intestine. The triglycerides are broken down into monoglycerides and free fatty acids, then imported across the intestinal mucosa. Once across, the triglycerides are resynthesized and transported to the liver or adipose tissue. Fatty acids are oxidized through fatty acid or β-oxidation into two-carbon acetyl CoA molecules, which can then enter the Krebs cycle to generate ATP. If excess acetyl CoA is created and overloads the capacity of the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA can be used to synthesize ketone bodies. When glucose is limited, ketone bodies can be oxidized and used for fuel. Excess acetyl CoA generated from excess glucose or carbohydrate ingestion can be used for fatty acid synthesis or lipogenesis. Acetyl CoA is used to create lipids, triglycerides, steroid hormones, cholesterol, and bile salts. Lipolysis is the breakdown of triglycerides into glycerol and fatty acids, making them easier for the body to process. 
The Gaia hypothesis states that the biosphere is its own living organism. 
Transform fault earthquakes have shallow focus because the plates meet near the surface. 
Figure 39.9 The trachea bifurcates into the right and left bronchi in the lungs. The right lung is made of three lobes and is larger. To accommodate the heart, the left lung is smaller and has only two lobes. 
Many biochemical processes occur through sequences of reactions called pathways. The total energy released by many of these pathways is much more than the energy a cell could handle if it were all released in a single step. For example, the combustion of glucose in a single step would release enough energy to kill a cell. By using a series of smaller steps that release less energy per reaction, however, the cell can extract the maximum energy from glucose without being destroyed. Referring to Equation 5.30, calculate how many grams of glucose would need to be metabolized to raise the temperature of a liver cell from an average body 3. 
Pulmonary circulation is the shorter loop of the cardiovascular system. It carries blood between the heart and lungs. Oxygen-poor blood flows from the heart to the lungs. In the lungs, the blood absorbs oxygen and releases carbon dioxide. Then the oxygen-rich blood returns to the heart. 
Cancer and Epigenetic Alterations Silencing genes through epigenetic mechanisms is also very common in cancer cells. There are characteristic modifications to histone proteins and DNA that are associated with silenced genes. In cancer cells, the DNA in the promoter region of silenced genes is methylated on cytosine DNA residues in CpG islands. Histone proteins that surround that region lack the acetylation modification that is present when the genes are expressed in normal cells. This combination of DNA methylation and histone deacetylation (epigenetic modifications that lead to gene silencing) is commonly found in cancer. When these modifications occur, the gene present in that chromosomal region is silenced. Increasingly, scientists understand how epigenetic changes are altered in cancer. Because these changes are temporary and can be reversed—for example, by preventing the action of the histone deacetylase protein that removes acetyl groups, or by DNA methyl transferase enzymes that add methyl groups to cytosines in DNA—it is possible to design new drugs and new therapies to take advantage of the reversible nature of these processes. Indeed, many researchers are testing how a silenced gene can be switched back on in a cancer cell to help re-establish normal growth patterns. Genes involved in the development of many other illnesses, ranging from allergies to inflammation to autism, are thought to be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms. As our knowledge of how genes are controlled deepens, new ways to treat diseases like cancer will emerge. 
The noble gases are characterized by their high ionization energies and low electron affinities. 
Movements of the body occur at joints. Describe how muscles are arranged around the joints of the body. 
The placenta allows nutrients and wastes to be exchanged between the mother and fetus. The fetus is connected to the placenta through the umbilical cord. 
Homeostasis refers to the balance, or equilibrium, within the cell or a body. It is an organism’s ability to keep a constant internal environment. Keeping a stable internal environment requires constant adjustments as conditions change inside and outside the cell. The adjusting of systems within a cell is referred to as homeostatic regulation. Because the internal and external environments of a cell are constantly changing, adjustments must be made continuously to stay at or near the normal proportions of all internal substances. This involves continual adjustments in transport of substances across the cell membrane. Homeostasis is a dynamic equilibrium rather than an unchanging state. The cellular processes discussed in the cell transport (passive and active transport) concepts all play an important role in homeostatic regulation. 
24.2 Production of Electromagnetic Waves • Electromagnetic waves are created by oscillating charges (which radiate whenever accelerated) and have the same frequency as the oscillation. • Since the electric and magnetic fields in most electromagnetic waves are perpendicular to the direction in which the wave moves, it is ordinarily a transverse wave. • The strengths of the electric and magnetic parts of the wave are related by. 
Although the masses of the electron, the proton, and the neutron are known to a high degree of precision (Table 1.3 "Properties of Subatomic Particles*"), the mass of any given atom is not simply the sum of the masses of its electrons, protons, and neutrons. For example, the ratio of the masses of 1H (hydrogen) and 2H (deuterium) is actually 0.500384, rather than 0.49979 as predicted from the numbers of neutrons and protons present. Although the difference in mass is small, it is extremely important because it is the source of the huge amounts of energy released in nuclear reactions (Chapter 20 "Nuclear Chemistry"). Because atoms are much too small to measure individually and do not have a charge, there is no convenient way to accurately measure absolute atomic masses. Scientists can measure relative atomic masses very accurately, however, using an instrument called a mass spectrometer. The technique is conceptually similar to the one Thomson used to determine the mass-to-charge ratio of the electron. First, electrons are removed from or added to atoms or molecules, thus producing charged particles called ions. When an electric field is applied, the ions are accelerated into a separate chamber where they are deflected from their initial trajectory by a magnetic field, like the electrons in Thomson’s experiment. The extent of the deflection depends on the mass-to-charge ratio of the ion. By measuring the relative deflection of ions that have the same charge, scientists can determine their relative masses (Figure 1.25 "Determining Relative Atomic Masses Using a Mass Spectrometer"). Thus it is not possible to calculate absolute atomic masses accurately by simply adding together the masses of the electrons, the protons, and the neutrons, and absolute atomic masses cannot be measured, but relative masses can be measured very accurately. It is actually rather common in chemistry to encounter a quantity whose magnitude can be measured only relative to some other quantity, rather than absolutely. We will encounter many other examples later in this text. In such cases,. 
This lip blister, or cold sore, is caused by a herpes virus. The virus is closely related to the virus that causes genital herpes. The genital herpes virus causes similar blisters on the genitals. If you’ve ever had a cold sore, you know how painful they can be. Genital herpes blisters are also painful. 
An enveloped virus. Varicella zoster virus causes chicken pox and shingles. 
Two factors that affect the pressure of fluids are depth and density. This explains why water pressure is greater deeper in the ocean and air pressure is greatest at sea level. Denser fluids, such as water, exert more pressure than less dense fluids, such as air. 
Asthma is a disease in which bronchioles in the lungs periodically swell and fill with mucus. Symptoms of asthma may include difficulty breathing, wheezing, coughing, and chest tightness. An asthma attack may be triggered by allergies, strenuous exercise, stress, or another respiratory illness such as a cold. 
After cells differentiate, all the major organs begin to form during the remaining weeks of embryonic development. A few of the developments that occur in the embryo during weeks 4 through 8 are listed in Figure below . As the embryo develops, it also grows in size. By the eighth week of development, the embryo is about 30 millimeters (just over 1 inch) in length. It may also have begun to move. 
The earth is also a conductor. Touching a charged object to the earth is called grounding . When you touch a conductor to the earth, you allow the earth to share the charge. Since the earth is billions of times bigger than the object, the earth takes nearly all of the charge. The charged object that was grounded now has zero charge. 
The temperature of the box is related to the average speed of the molecules. Use momentum principles to relate temperature to pressure. Explain conceptually, in words rather than with equations. 
Primates usually rely more on the sense of vision rather than the sense of smell, which is the dominant sense in many other mammals. The importance of vision in primates is reflected by the bony socket that surrounds and protects the primate eye. Primates have widely spaced eyes in the same plane that give them stereoscopic (3-D) vision, needed for judging distances. Some primates, including humans, have also evolved color vision. 
Introduction Breathing is an involuntary event. How often a breath is taken and how much air is inhaled or exhaled are tightly regulated by the respiratory center in the brain. Humans, when they aren’t exerting themselves, breathe approximately 15 times per minute on average. Canines, like the dog in Figure 39.1, have a respiratory rate of about 15–30 breaths per minute. With every inhalation, air fills the lungs, and with every exhalation, air rushes back out. That air is doing more than just inflating and deflating the lungs in the chest cavity. The air contains oxygen that crosses the lung tissue, enters the bloodstream, and travels to organs and tissues. Oxygen (O2) enters the cells where it is used for metabolic reactions that produce ATP, a high-energy compound. At the same time, these reactions release carbon dioxide (CO2) as a by-product. CO2 is toxic and must be eliminated. Carbon dioxide exits the cells, enters the bloodstream, travels back to the lungs, and is expired out of the body during exhalation. 
Many skeletal muscles are attached to the ends of bones where they meet at a joint. The muscles span the joint and connect the bones. When the muscles contract, they pull on the bones, causing them to move. 
7.2 | The Skull By the end of this section, you will be able to: • List and identify the bones of the brain case and face • Locate the major suture lines of the skull and name the bones associated with each • Locate and define the boundaries of the anterior, middle, and posterior cranial fossae, the temporal fossa, and infratemporal fossa • Define the paranasal sinuses and identify the location of each • Name the bones that make up the walls of the orbit and identify the openings associated with the orbit • Identify the bones and structures that form the nasal septum and nasal conchae, and locate the hyoid bone • Identify the bony openings of the skull The cranium (skull) is the skeletal structure of the head that supports the face and protects the brain. It is subdivided into the facial bones and the brain case, or cranial vault (Figure 7.3). The facial bones underlie the facial structures, form the nasal cavity, enclose the eyeballs, and support the teeth of the upper and lower jaws. The rounded brain case surrounds and protects the brain and houses the middle and inner ear structures. In the adult, the skull consists of 22 individual bones, 21 of which are immobile and united into a single unit. The 22nd bone is the mandible (lower jaw), which is the only moveable bone of the skull. 
Urine leaves the body through the urethra . 
An explosive eruption produces huge clouds of volcanic ash. Chunks of the volcano fly high into the atmosphere. Explosive eruptions can be tens of thousands of times as powerful as an atomic bomb ( Figure below ). Hot magma beneath the surface mixes with water. This forms gases. The gas pressure grows until it must be released. The volcano erupts in an enormous explosion. 
Circadian rhythms are regular changes in biology or behavior that occur in a 24-hour cycle. In humans, for example, blood pressure and body temperature change in a regular way throughout each 24-hour day. 
A radioactive isotope, or radioisotope, has atoms with unstable nuclei. The unstable nuclei naturally decay, or break down, by losing energy and particles of matter to become more stable. If they gain or lose protons as they decay, they become different elements. Over time, as the nuclei continue to decay, less and less of the original radioisotope remains. 
The modern atomic theory establishes the concepts of atoms and how they compose matter. 
The pistil is the female reproductive structure of a flower. It consists of a stigma, style, and ovary. The stigma is raised and sticky to help it catch pollen. The style supports the stigma and connects it to the ovary, which contains the egg. Petals attract pollinators to the flower. Petals are often brightly colored so pollinators will notice them. 
Electromagnetic force is a force of attraction or repulsion between all electrically charged particles. This force is transferred between charged particles of matter by fundamental force-carrying particles called photons. Because of electromagnetic force, particles with opposite charges attract each other and particles with the same charge repel each other. 
Covalent bond energies can be used to estimate the enthalpy changes of chemical reactions. 
5.2 Drag Forces 5. Athletes such as swimmers and bicyclists wear body suits in competition. Formulate a list of pros and cons of such suits. Two expressions were used for the drag force experienced by a moving object in a liquid. One depended upon the speed, while the other was proportional to the square of the speed. In which types of motion would each of these expressions be more applicable than the other one? 7. As cars travel, oil and gasoline leaks onto the road surface. If a light rain falls, what does this do to the control of the car? Does a heavy rain make any difference? 8. Why can a squirrel jump from a tree branch to the ground and run away undamaged, while a human could break a bone in such a fall?. 
Platelets are cell fragments involved in blood clotting. They stick to tears in blood vessels and to each other, forming a plug at the site of injury. They also release chemicals that are needed for clotting to occur. 
The Milky Way Galaxy is a spiral galaxy that contains about 400 billion stars. Like other spiral galaxies, it has a disk, a central bulge, and spiral arms. The disk is about 100,000 light-years across. It is about 3,000 light years thick. Most of the galaxy’s gas, dust, young stars, and open clusters are in the disk. Some astronomers think that there is a gigantic black hole at the center of the galaxy. Figure below shows what the Milky Way probably looks like from the outside. 
Cumulus clouds are white and puffy. Convection currents make them grow upward, and they may grow very tall. When they produce rain, they are called cumulonimbus. 
General Cnidarian Life Cycle. Cnidarians may reproduce both asexually and sexually. 
Forests are also being destroyed. Trees may be cut down for their wood, or they may be burned to clear the land for farming. Burning wood releases more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. You can see how a tropical rainforest was cleared for farming in Figure below . With forests shrinking, there are fewer trees to remove carbon dioxide from the air. This makes the greenhouse effect even worse. 
Electron Configurations of Ions We have seen that ions are formed when atoms gain or lose electrons. A cation (positively charged ion) forms when one or more electrons are removed from a parent atom. For main group elements, the electrons that were added last are the first electrons removed. For transition metals and inner transition metals, however, electrons in the s orbital are easier to remove than the d or f electrons, and so the highest ns electrons are lost, and then the (n – 1)d or (n – 2)f electrons are removed. An anion (negatively charged ion) forms when one or more electrons are added to a parent atom. The added electrons fill in the order predicted by the Aufbau principle. 
There are many layers of rock in the Earth's surface. Newer layers form on top of the older layers; the deepest rock layers are the oldest. Therefore, you can tell how old a fossil is by observing in which layer of rock it was found. The fossils and the order in which fossils appear is called the fossil record . The fossil record provides evidence for when organisms lived on Earth, how species evolved, and how some species have gone extinct. Geologists use a method called radiometric dating to determine the exact age of rocks and fossils in each layer of rock. This technique, which is possible because radioactive materials decay at a known rate, measures how much of the radioactive materials in each rock layer have broken down ( Figure below ). 
Bacteria called cyanobacteria are very important. They are bluish green in color (see Figure below ) because they contain chlorophyll (but not chloroplasts, of course). They make food through photosynthesis and release oxygen into the air. These bacteria were probably responsible for adding oxygen to the air on early Earth. This changed the planet’s atmosphere. It also changed the direction of evolution. Ancient cyanobacteria also may have evolved into the chloroplasts of plant cells. 
Within the first 8 weeks of gestation, a developing embryo establishes the rudimentary structures of all of its organs and tissues from the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. This process is called organogenesis. Like the central nervous system, the heart also begins its development in the embryo as a tube-like structure, connected via capillaries to the chorionic villi. Cells of the primitive tube-shaped heart are capable of electrical conduction and contraction. The heart begins beating in the beginning of the fourth week, although it does not actually pump embryonic blood until a week later, when the oversized liver has begun producing red blood cells. (This is a temporary responsibility of the embryonic liver that the bone marrow will assume during fetal development. ) During weeks 4–5, the eye pits form, limb buds become apparent, and the rudiments of the pulmonary system are formed. During the sixth week, uncontrolled fetal limb movements begin to occur. The gastrointestinal system develops too rapidly for the embryonic abdomen to accommodate it, and the intestines temporarily loop into the umbilical cord. Paddle-shaped hands and feet develop fingers and toes by the process of apoptosis (programmed cell death), which causes the tissues between the fingers to disintegrate. By week 7, the facial structure is more complex and includes nostrils, outer ears, and lenses (Figure 28.15). By the eighth week, the head is nearly as large as the rest of the embryo’s body, and all major brain structures are in place. The external genitalia are apparent, but at this point, male and female embryos are indistinguishable. Bone begins to replace cartilage in the embryonic skeleton through the process of ossification. By the end of the embryonic period, the embryo is approximately 3 cm (1.2 in) from crown to rump and weighs approximately 8 g (0.25 oz). 
The jointed appendages of arthropods may be used as legs for walking. Being jointed makes them more flexible. Try walking or climbing stairs without bending your knees, and you’ll see why joints are helpful. In most arthropods, the appendages on the head have been modified for other functions. Figure below shows some of the head appendages found in arthropods. Sensory organs such as eyes are also found on the head. 
Sponges reproduce both asexually and sexually. Asexual reproduction occurs by budding. Figure below shows the sponge life cycle when sexual reproduction is involved. Adult sponges produce eggs and sperm. In many species, the same individuals produce both. However, they don’t produce eggs and sperm at the same time. As a result, self-fertilization is unlikely to occur. What is an advantage of avoiding self-fertilization?. 
Polluted water can form a frothy green scum on the surface. This "pond scum" is actually a living organism, algae. The algae are plant-like protists. Usually the algae are too small to notice, but sometimes algae grow in excess because of the excess nutrients in polluted water. 
Skin is made up of two layers, the epidermis and the dermis. 
Only the top 200 meters or so of water receive enough sunlight for photosynthesis. This part of the water is called the photic zone. Below 200 meters, there is too little sunlight for photosynthesis to take place. This part of the water is called the aphotic zone. In this zone, food must come from other sources. It may be made by chemosynthesis, in which microorganisms use energy in chemicals instead of sunlight to make food. Or, food may drift down from the water above. 
A mixture is a combination of two or more substances in any proportion. This is different from a compound, which consists of substances in fixed proportions. The substances in a mixture also do not combine chemically to form a new substance, as they do in a compound. Instead, they just intermingle and keep their original properties. The lemonade pictured above is a mixture because it doesn’t have fixed proportions of ingredients. It could have more or less lemon juice, for example, or more or less sugar, and it would still be lemonade. 
Summary 3.1 Formula Mass and the Mole Concept The formula mass of a substance is the sum of the average atomic masses of each atom represented in the chemical formula and is expressed in atomic mass units. The formula mass of a covalent compound is also called the molecular mass. A convenient amount unit for expressing very large numbers of atoms or molecules is the mole. Experimental measurements have determined the number of entities composing 1 mole of substance to be 6.022 × 1023, a quantity called Avogadro’s number. The mass in grams of 1 mole of substance is its molar mass. Due to the use of the same reference substance in defining the atomic mass unit and the mole, the formula mass (amu) and molar mass (g/mol) for any substance are numerically equivalent (for example, one H2O molecule weighs approximately18 amu and 1 mole of H2O molecules weighs approximately 18 g). 3.2 Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas The chemical identity of a substance is defined by the types and relative numbers of atoms composing its fundamental entities (molecules in the case of covalent compounds, ions in the case of ionic compounds). A compound’s percent composition provides the mass percentage of each element in the compound, and it is often experimentally determined and used to derive the compound’s empirical formula. The empirical formula mass of a covalent compound may be compared to the compound’s molecular or molar mass to derive a molecular formula. 3.3 Molarity Solutions are homogeneous mixtures. Many solutions contain one component, called the solvent, in which other components, called solutes, are dissolved. An aqueous solution is one for which the solvent is water. The concentration of a solution is a measure of the relative amount of solute in a given amount of solution. Concentrations may be measured using various units, with one very useful unit being molarity, defined as the number of moles of solute per liter of solution. The solute concentration of a solution may be decreased by adding solvent, a process referred to as dilution. The dilution equation is a simple relation between concentrations and volumes of a solution before and after dilution. 3.4 Other Units for Solution Concentrations In addition to molarity, a number of other solution concentration units are used in various applications. Percentage concentrations based on the solution components’ masses, volumes, or both are useful for expressing relatively high concentrations, whereas lower concentrations are conveniently expressed using ppm or ppb units. These units are popular in environmental, medical, and other fields where mole-based units such as molarity are not as commonly used. 
In receptor-mediated endocytosis, as in phagocytosis, clathrin is attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. If uptake of a compound is dependent on receptor-mediated endocytosis and the process is ineffective, the material will not be removed from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids and increase in concentration. Some human diseases are caused by the failure of receptor-mediated endocytosis. For example, the form of cholesterol termed low-density lipoprotein or LDL (also referred to as “bad” cholesterol) is removed from the blood by receptor-mediated endocytosis. In the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterolemia, the LDL receptors are defective or missing entirely. People with this condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells cannot clear LDL particles from their blood. Although receptor-mediated endocytosis is designed to bring specific substances that are normally found in the extracellular fluid into the cell, other substances may gain entry into the cell at the same site. Flu viruses, diphtheria, and cholera toxin all have sites that cross-react with normal receptor-binding sites and gain entry into cells. 
When a living thing responds to its environment, it is responding to a stimulus. A stimulus ( stimuli, plural ) is something in the environment that causes a reaction in an organism. The reaction a stimulus produces is called a response . 
Bacteria change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere to nitrogen compounds that plants can absorb. 
Humans have walked on only two planetary bodies: Earth and the Moon. The footprints the men left behind are the first signs of life ever on the Moon. Scientists learned a great deal about the Moon from the Apollo missions. The samples that were brought back have been studied in laboratories. We know an incredible amount about the Moon because of these samples. Having these rocks radically changed our thinking about the Moon. 
In addition to the amount of salts, other conditions in ocean water vary from place to place. One is the amount of nutrients in the water. Another is the amount of sunlight that reaches the water. These conditions depend mainly on two factors: distance from shore and depth of water. Oceans are divided into zones ( Figure below ) based on these two factors. The ocean floor makes up another zone. 
In 1905, the physicist Albert Einstein developed a new theory about electromagnetic radiation. The theory is often called the wave-particle theory . It explains how electromagnetic radiation can behave as both a wave and a particle. Einstein argued that when an electron returns to a lower energy level and gives off electromagnetic energy, the energy is released as a discrete “packet” of energy. We now call such a packet of energy a photon . According to Einstein, a photon resembles a particle but moves like a wave. You can see this in the Figure below . The theory posits that waves of photons traveling through space or matter make up electromagnetic radiation. 
In many ways, humans are unique among mammals. For example, we have bigger brains and a greater ability to learn than any other species in the mammalian class. In many ways, however, we are typical of the mammalian order to which we belong. That order is the Primate Order. To fully understand what it means to be human, you need to know more about this fascinating order of mammals. 
What if you want a different approach? Let's say you don't want to wrap a flat piece of paper around a round object. You could put a flat piece of paper right on the area that you want to map. This type of map is called a gnomonic map projection ( Figure below ). The paper only touches Earth at one point. The sizes and shapes of countries near that point are good. The poles are often mapped this way to avoid distortion. A gnomic projection is best for use over a small area. 
third phase of mitosis during which sister chromatids separate and move to opposite poles of the cell. 
Surface currents are like streams flowing through the surface of the ocean. They are caused mainly by winds. Earth’s rotation influences their direction. This is called the Coriolis effect. Surface currents may affect the climate of nearby coasts. 
Landslides are sudden and massive falls of rock down a slope. Landslides may be very destructive or even deadly. Slump and creep are slower types of mass wasting. 
Weather makes life interesting. Weather also causes weathering. Weathering is the slow wearing down of rocks on Earth’s surface. Wind-blown sand scours rocks like sandpaper. Glaciers of ice scrape across rock surfaces like a file. Even gentle rain may seep into rocks and slowly dissolve them. If the water freezes, it expands. This eventually causes the rocks to crack. Without the atmosphere, none of this weathering would happen. Rocks at the surface would be pristine and unaltered. 
Many important biological processes involve redox reactions, which frequently store and release energy. For example, photosynthesis involves the reduction of carbon dioxide into glucose and the oxidation of water into oxygen. This process stores the energy of sunlight in the bonds of sugars. The reverse reaction, cellular respiration, converts the energy in glucose into ATP. Cellular respiration involves the oxidation of glucose to carbon dioxide and the reduction of oxygen gas to water. This process depends on the reduction of NAD + to the electron carrier NADH, and the reverse oxidation of NADH to NAD + . The reduction of NAD + leads to the formation of a proton (H + ) gradient, which drives the synthesis of ATP. NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and NADPH (Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) are electron carriers in biological systems. The term redox state is often used to describe the balance between NAD + /NADH and NADP + /NADPH (Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). 
Many of the fibers that compose the materials for our clothes are naturally occurring. Silk and cotton are examples of natural fibers. Silk is produced by the silkworm, and cotton is grown as a plant. However, several chemical processes are used to treat silk thread so that it is shrink-resistant and will repel water. Chemical dyes are frequently used to color various fabrics. Cleaning requires special soaps or chemicals used to dry-clean materials. Cotton will grow better if the boll weevil (an insect that kills the plant) is eliminated with the use of specific insecticides. Ironing of cotton is made easier by the use of chemicals that produce a permanent press in the material. 
The aim of basic science is to discover new knowledge. It leads to a better understanding of the natural world. It doesn’t necessarily have any practical use. An example of basic research in life science is studying how yeast cells grow and divide. Yeasts are single-celled organisms that are easy to study. By studying yeast cells, life scientists discovered the series of events called the cell cycle. The cell cycle works not only in yeasts but in all other organisms with similar cells. Therefore, this basic research made a major contribution to our understanding of living things. Watch the following animation to learn more about the basic yeast research and the cell cycle. You can also see yeast cells dividing. 
mid-ocean ridges : A long chain of mountains that rises up high above the deep seafloor. An example is the light blue gash in middle of Atlantic Ocean. Light blue is higher elevation than dark blue. 
The oldest animal fossils are about 630 million years old. The earliest animals were aquatic invertebrates. The first vertebrates evolved around 550 million years ago. By 500 million years ago, most modern phyla of animals had evolved. 
In prokaryotes, a combination of activators and repressors determines whether a gene is transcribed. As you know, prokaryotic organisms are fairly simple organisms with much less DNA. Prokaryotic genes are arranged in operons , a region of DNA with a promoter, an operator , and one or more genes that encode proteins needed to perform a certain task. To maintain homeostasis (and survive), the organism must quickly adapt changing environmental conditions. The regulation of transcription plays a key role in this process. 
Birds are endothermic tetrapod vertebrates. They are bipedal, which means they walk on two legs. Birds also lay amniotic eggs with hard, calcium carbonate shells. Although birds are the most recent class of vertebrates to evolve, they are now the most numerous vertebrates on Earth. Why have birds been so successful? What traits allowed them to increase and diversify so rapidly? Birds can vary considerably in size, as you can see from the world’s smallest and largest birds, pictured in Figure below . The tiny bee hummingbird is just 5 centimeters (2 inches) long, whereas the ostrich towers over people at a height of 2.7 meters (9 feet). All modern birds have wings, feathers, and beaks. They have a number of other unique traits as well, most of which are adaptations for flight. Flight is used by birds as a means of locomotion in order to find food and mates and to avoid predators. Although not all modern birds can fly, they all evolved from ancestors that could. 
Which of the following statements about the menstrual cycle is false? a. Progesterone levels rise during the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle and the secretory phase of the uterine cycle. Menstruation occurs just after LH and FSH levels peak. Menstruation occurs after progesterone levels drop. Estrogen levels rise before ovulation, while progesterone levels rise after. Menopause As women approach their mid-40s to mid-50s, their ovaries begin to lose their sensitivity to FSH and LH. Menstrual periods become less frequent and finally cease; this is menopause. There are still eggs and potential follicles on the ovaries, but without the stimulation of FSH and LH, they will not produce a viable egg to be released. The outcome of this is the inability to have children. The side effects of menopause include hot flashes, heavy sweating (especially at night), headaches, some hair loss, muscle pain, vaginal dryness, insomnia, depression, weight gain, and mood swings. Estrogen is involved in calcium metabolism and, without it, blood levels of calcium decrease. To replenish the blood, calcium is lost from bone which may decrease the bone density and lead to osteoporosis. Supplementation of estrogen in the form of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can prevent bone loss, but the therapy can have negative side effects. While HRT is thought to give some protection from colon cancer, osteoporosis, heart disease, macular degeneration, and possibly depression, its negative side effects include increased risk of: stroke or heart attack, blood clots, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer, gall bladder disease, and possibly dementia. 
With fossil fuels becoming more expensive and less available, scientists are looking for other energy sources. Hydrogen has long been considered an ideal source, since it does not pollute when it burns. The problem has been finding ways to generate hydrogen economically. One new approach that is being studied is photoelectrolysis – the generation of electricity using photovoltaic cells to split water molecules. This technique is still in the research stage, but appears to be a very promising source of power in the future. 
Segmented worms have a well-developed body cavity filled with fluid. This fluid-filled cavity serves as a hydroskeleton , a supportive structure that helps move the worm's muscles. Only the most primitive worms (the flatworms) lack a body cavity. 
The enzyme pepsin works only in the presence of acid. A strong acid is secreted into the stomach. It provides the acid that pepsin needs. You will learn about acids in the next chapter, "Chemistry of Solutions. " Vinegar and lemon juice are two common acids. 
Many people have problems with their vision , or ability to see. Often, the problem is due to the shape of the eyes and how they focus light. Two of the most common vision problems are nearsightedness and farsightedness, which you can read about below. You may even have one of these vision problems yourself. Usually, the problems can be corrected with contact lenses or lenses in eyeglasses. In many people, they can also be corrected with laser surgery, which reshapes the outer layer of the eye. For a video about vision problems, go to this URL: http://www. youtube. com/watch?v=ekSGbXt4XdI. 
Negative feedback also controls insulin secretion by the pancreas. You can interact with a feedback loop of this process at the link below. http://www. abpischools. org. uk/page/modules/hormones/horm6. cfm?coSiteNavigation_allTopic=1. 
The organ systems of the body work together to carry out life processes and maintain homeostasis. The body is in homeostasis when its internal environment is kept more-or-less constant. For example, levels of sugar, carbon dioxide, and water in the blood must be kept within narrow ranges. This requires continuous adjustments. For example:. 
In combination or synthesis reactions, two chemical species combine to produce a new compound. The general expression for a combination reaction is:. 
Inside of elements, you will find identical atoms. An atom is the simplest and smallest particle of matter that still has chemical properties of the element. Atoms are the building block of all of the elements that make up the matter in your body or any other living or non-living thing. Atoms are so small that only the most powerful microscopes can see them. 
The cell body contains the nucleus and other organelles. 
Pangaea has been breaking apart since about 250 million years ago. Divergent plate boundaries formed within the continents to cause them to rift apart. The continents are still moving apart. The Pacific is shrinking as the Atlantic is growing. The Appalachians ( Figure below ) are now on a passive margin. The mighty mountains have weathered and eroded to what they are today. 
Cell division is part of the life cycle of virtually all cells. Cell division is the process in which one cell divides to form two new cells. 
All streams and rivers have several features in common. These features are shown in ( Figure below ). The place where a stream or river starts is its source. The source might be a spring, where water flows out of the ground. Or the source might be water from melting snow on a mountain top. A single stream may have multiple sources. A stream or river probably ends when it flows into a body of water, such as a lake or an ocean. A stream ends at its mouth. As the water flows into the body of water, it slows down and drops the sediment it was carrying. The sediment may build up to form a delta. 
38.3 Joints and Skeletal Movement The structural classification of joints divides them into bony, fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints. The bones of fibrous joints are held together by fibrous connective tissue; the three types of fibrous joints are sutures, syndesomes, and gomphoses. Cartilaginous joints are joints in which the bones are connected by cartilage; the two types of cartilaginous joints are synchondroses and symphyses. Synovial joints are joints that have a space between the adjoining bones. The functional classification divides joints into three categories: synarthroses, amphiarthroses, and diarthroses. The movement of synovial joints can be classified as one of four different types: gliding, angular, rotational, or special movement. Gliding movements occur as relatively flat bone surfaces move past each other. Angular movements are produced when the angle between the bones of a joint changes. Rotational movement is the movement of a bone as it rotates around its own longitudinal axis. Special movements include inversion, eversion, protraction, retraction, elevation, depression, dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, supination, pronation, and opposition. Synovial joints are also classified into six different categories on the basis of the shape and structure of the joint: planar, hinge, pivot, condyloid, saddle, and ball-and-socket. 
When ancient plants underwent photosynthesis, they changed energy in sunlight to stored chemical energy in food. The plants used the food and so did the organisms that ate the plants. After the plants and other organisms died, their remains gradually changed to fossil fuels as they were covered and compressed by layers of sediments. Petroleum and natural gas formed from ocean organisms and are found together. Coal formed from giant tree ferns and other swamp plants. 
The hemisphere that is tilted away from the Sun is cooler because it receives less direct rays. As Earth orbits the Sun, the Northern Hemisphere goes from winter to spring, then summer and fall. The Southern Hemisphere does the opposite from summer to fall to winter to spring. When it is winter in the Northern hemisphere, it is summer in the Southern hemisphere, and vice versa. 
6. Aging is associated with the death of cells. Give two reasons why cells die. 
Active transport requires energy from the cell. It occurs when substances move from areas of lower to higher concentration or when very large molecules are transported. Types of active transport include ion pumps, such as the sodium-potassium pump, and vesicle transport, which includes endocytosis and exocytosis. 
All compounds form when atoms of different elements share or transfer electrons. In water, the atoms share electrons. In some other compounds, called ionic compounds , atoms transfer electrons. The electrons actually move from one atom to another. When atoms transfer electrons in this way, they become charged particles called ions. The ions are held together by ionic bonds. 
Most cancers are caused by mutations. Mutations are random errors in genes. Mutations that lead to cancer usually occur in genes that control the cell cycle. Because of the mutations, abnormal cells are allowed to divide. 
Wind-blown pollen might land anywhere and be wasted. Another adaptation solved this problem. Plants evolved traits that attract specific animal pollinators. Like the bee in Figure below , a pollinator picks up pollen on its body and carries it directly to another plant of the same species. This greatly increases the chance that fertilization will occur. 
When ordered by atomic number, the discrepancies within Mendeleev’s table disappeared. Tellurium has an atomic number of 52, while iodine has an atomic number of 53. So even though tellurium does indeed have a greater atomic mass than iodine, it is properly placed before iodine in the periodic table. Mendeleev and Moseley are credited with being most responsible for the modern periodic law : When elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic number, there is a periodic repetition of their chemical and physical properties. The result is the periodic table as we know it today. Each new horizontal row of the periodic table corresponds to the beginning of a new period because a new principal energy level is being filled with electrons. Elements with similar chemical properties appear at regular intervals, within the vertical columns called groups . 
Monosaccharides A monosaccharide is a monomer of carbohydrates. Five monosaccharides are important in the body. Three of these are the hexose sugars, so called because they each contain six atoms of carbon. These are glucose, fructose, and galactose, shown in Figure 2.18a. The remaining monosaccharides are the two pentose sugars, each of which contains five atoms of carbon. They are ribose and deoxyribose, shown in Figure 2.18b. 
Some consumers such as the mushroom in Figure above get their energy from dead organic matter. For example, they might consume dead leaves on a forest floor. 
Open clusters are groups of young stars loosely held together by gravity. 
The distance between the Earth and the Sun is about 93 million miles, or 150 million kilometers. Earth revolves around the Sun at an average speed of about 27 kilometers (17 miles) per second. Mercury and Venus are closer to the Sun, so they take shorter times to make one orbit. Mercury takes only about 88 Earth days to make one trip around the Sun. All of the other planets take longer amounts of time. The exact amount depends on the planet's distance from the Sun. Saturn takes more than 29 Earth years to make one revolution around the Sun. How old would you be if you were on Jupiter?. 
Higher pressures increase the solubility of gases. You are probably familiar with this concept as it relates to carbonated beverages. Before opening the container, the inside is pressurized, so a large amount of CO 2 is dissolved in the liquid. After opening, the pressure decreases (to the ambient pressure), so the solubility of CO 2 drops, causing it to bubble out of solution. Because they are not compressible like gases, solid and liquid solutes do not have noticeable changes in solubility at different external pressures. 
Electrons are transferred from hair to a balloon rubbed against the hair. Then the oppositely charged hair and balloon attract each other. 
Scientists first make observations that raise questions. An observation is the act of noting or detecting phenomenon through the senses. For example, noting that a room is dark is an observation made through sight. 
17.6 | The Adrenal Glands By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Describe the location and structure of the adrenal glands • Identify the hormones produced by the adrenal cortex and adrenal medulla, and summarize their target cells and effects The adrenal glands are wedges of glandular and neuroendocrine tissue adhering to the top of the kidneys by a fibrous capsule (Figure 17.17). The adrenal glands have a rich blood supply and experience one of the highest rates of blood flow in the body. They are served by several arteries branching off the aorta, including the suprarenal and renal arteries. Blood flows to each adrenal gland at the adrenal cortex and then drains into the adrenal medulla. Adrenal hormones are released into the circulation via the left and right suprarenal veins. 
Water as a Component of Liquid Mixtures A mixture is a combination of two or more substances, each of which maintains its own chemical identity. In other words, the constituent substances are not chemically bonded into a new, larger chemical compound. The concept is easy to imagine if you think of powdery substances such as flour and sugar; when you stir them together in a bowl, they obviously do not bond to form a new compound. The room air you breathe is a gaseous mixture, containing three discrete elements—nitrogen, oxygen, and argon—and one compound, carbon dioxide. There are three types of liquid mixtures, all of which contain water as a key component. These are solutions, colloids, and suspensions. 
As shown in Figure below , transcription is controlled by regulatory proteins . The proteins bind to regions of DNA, called regulatory elements , which are located near promoters. After regulatory proteins bind to regulatory elements, they can interact with RNA polymerase, the enzyme that transcribes DNA to mRNA. Regulatory proteins are typically either activators or repressors. 
In type 2 diabetes, the body cells cannot use insulin properly. 
Recall that eukaryotic organisms also include animals, protists, and fungi. Eukaryotes have cells with nuclei that contain DNA, and membrane-bound organelles, such as mitochondria. Photosynthesis is the process by which plants capture the energy of sunlight and use carbon dioxide from the air (and water) to make their own food, the carbohydrate glucose. Plants have chloroplasts, the organelle of photosynthesis, and are known as producers and autotrophs. Other organisms are heterotrophic consumers, meaning they must obtain their nutrients from another organism, as these organisms lack chloroplasts. Lastly, plants must be multicellular, composed of more than one cell. There are no single-celled plants. Recall that some protists, such as algae, are eukaryotic and photosynthetic but are not considered plants. Unlike plants, algae is mostly unicellular. 
Plants alternate between haploid and diploid generations. Haploid cells have one of each pair of chromosomes. Diploid cells have two of each pair. 
The body of the simplest sponges takes the shape of a cylinder with a large central cavity, the spongocoel. Water enters the spongocoel from numerous pores in the body wall. Water flows out through a large opening called the osculum (Figure 15.9). However, sponges exhibit a diversity of body forms, which vary in the size and branching of the spongocoel, the number of osculi, and where the cells that filter food from the water are located. Sponges consist of an outer layer of flattened cells and an inner layer of cells called choanocytes separated by a jellylike substance called mesohyl. The mesohyl contains embedded amoeboid cells that secrete tiny needles called spicules or protein fibers that help give the sponge its structural strength. The cell body of the choanocyte is embedded in mesohyl but protruding into the spongocoel is a mesh-like collar surrounding a single flagellum. The beating of flagella from all choanocytes moves water through the sponge. Food particles are trapped in mucus produced by the sieve-like collar of the choanocytes and are ingested by phagocytosis. This process is called intracellular digestion. Amoebocytes take up nutrients repackaged in food vacuoles of the choanocytes and deliver them to other cells within the sponge. 
Figure 5.17 A uniporter carries one molecule or ion. A symporter carries two different molecules or ions, both in the same direction. An antiporter also carries two different molecules or ions, but in different directions. (credit: modification of work by “Lupask”/Wikimedia Commons). 
Ribosomes are small organelles and are the sites of protein synthesis (or assembly). They are made of ribosomal protein and ribosomal RNA, and are found in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. Unlike other organelles, ribosomes are not surrounded by a membrane. Each ribosome has two parts, a large and a small subunit, as shown in Figure below . The subunits are attached to one another. Ribosomes can be found alone or in groups within the cytoplasm. Some ribosomes are attached to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (as shown in Figure below ), and others are attached to the nuclear envelope. 
Figure 22.31 The force on a current-carrying wire in a magnetic field is. 
A concave lens is thicker at the edges than it is in the middle. You can see the shape of a concave lens in the Figure below . From the diagram, it’s clear that the lens causes rays of light to diverge, or spread apart, as they pass through it. Note that the image formed by a concave lens is on the same side of the lens as the object. It is also smaller than the object and right-side up. However, it isn’t a real image. It is a virtual image. Your brain “tricks” you into seeing an image there. The light rays actually pass through the glass to the other side and spread out in all directions. You can explore the formation of images by a concave lens at this URL: http://phet. colorado. edu/sims/geometric-optics/geometric-optics_en. html. 
CHAPTER REVIEW 25.1 Physical Characteristics of Urine The kidney glomerulus filters blood mainly based on particle size to produce a filtrate lacking cells or large proteins. Most of the ions and molecules in the filtrate are needed by the body and must be reabsorbed farther down the nephron tubules, resulting in the formation of urine. Urine characteristics change depending on water intake, exercise, environmental temperature, and nutrient intake. Urinalysis analyzes characteristics of the urine and is used to diagnose diseases. A minimum of 400 to 500 mL urine must be produced daily to rid the body of wastes. Excessive quantities of urine may indicate diabetes insipidus or diabetes mellitus. The pH range of urine is 4.5 to 8.0, and is affected by diet. Osmolarity ranges from 50 to 1200 milliosmoles, and is a reflection of the amount of water being recovered or lost by renal nephrons. 
Butter is a fat that is a solid at room temperature. What type of fatty acid does butter contain? How do you know?. 
Radiocarbon is useful for relatively young, carbon-based materials. Other longer-lived isotopes are good for older rocks and minerals. 
Like mollusks and annelids, aquatic arthropods may have gills to exchange gases with the water (discussed below). Terrestrial arthropods, on the other hand, have special respiratory structures to exchange gases with the air. These are described in Figure below . 
Scientific method is a process consisting of making observations, developing a hypothesis, and testing that hypothesis. 
An analog signal consists of continuously changing voltage in a circuit. For example, microphones encode sounds as analog signals. 
Gene expression is regulated primarily at the transcriptional level. 
The largest, most complex covalent molecules have thousands of atoms. Examples include proteins and carbohydrates, which are compounds in living things. The smallest, simplest covalent compounds have molecules with just two atoms. An example is hydrogen chloride (HCl). It consists of one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom, as you can see in the Figure below . You can watch an animation of hydrogen chloride forming at the following URL. 
A tissue is a group of connected cells that have a similar function within an organism. More complex organisms such as jellyfish, coral, and sea anemones have a tissue level of organization. For example, jellyfish have tissues that have separate protective, digestive, and sensory functions. 
All of the planets rotate on their axes in the same direction that they move around the Sun. Except for Uranus. Uranus is tilted on its side. Its axis is almost parallel to its orbit. So Uranus rolls along like a bowling ball as it revolves around the Sun. How did Uranus get this way? Scientists think that the planet was struck and knocked over by another planet-sized object. This collision probably took place billions of years ago. 
Lobsters are one kind of arthropod food source. 
Molecular evidence for evolution includes that all living things share the same biochemical building blocks. 
energy. Red marrow is where hematopoiesis—the production of blood cells—takes place. Red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets are all produced in the red marrow. 
Hormonal Regulation of Metabolism Blood glucose levels vary widely over the course of a day as periods of food consumption alternate with periods of fasting. Insulin and glucagon are the two hormones primarily responsible for maintaining homeostasis of blood glucose levels. Additional regulation is mediated by the thyroid hormones. 
All living things are capable of reproduction, the process by which living things give rise to offspring. 
A desmosome is a cell junction specialized for cell-to-cell adhesion. They are found in simple and stratified squamous epithelium, and in muscle tissue where they bind muscle cells to one another. These junctions are composed of complexes of cell surface adhesion proteins and linking proteins. These proteins have both an intracellular and extracellular region. Inside the cell, they attach to intracellular filaments of the cytoskeleton. Outside the cell, they attach to other adhesion proteins. 
The only light that people can see is called visible light . This light consists of a very narrow range of wavelengths that falls between infrared light and ultraviolet light. Within the visible range, we see light of different wavelengths as different colors of light, from red light, which has the longest wavelength, to violet light, which has the shortest wavelength (see Figure below ). When all of the wavelengths of visible light are combined, as they are in sunlight, visible light appears white. You can learn more about visible light at this URL: http://www. youtube. com/watch?v=PMtC34pzKGc . 
The cardiovascular system is the system of organs that delivers blood to all the cells of the body. It’s like the body’s lifeline. Without the cardiovascular system circulating your blood, you couldn’t survive. 
U-235 nuclei can capture neutrons and disintegrate more efficiently if the neutrons are moving slower than the speed at which they are released. Fission reactors use a moderator surrounding the fuel rods to slow down the neutrons. Water is not only a good coolant but also a good moderator, so a common type of fission reactor has the fuel core submerged in a huge pool of water. This type of reactor is called a light water reactor or LWR. All public electricity generating fission reactors in the United States are LWRs. 
Calculations are described showing conversions between molar mass and density for gases. 
Runner’s Knee Runner’s knee, also known as patellofemoral syndrome, is the most common overuse injury among runners. It is most frequent in adolescents and young adults, and is more common in females. It often results from excessive running, particularly downhill, but may also occur in athletes who do a lot of knee bending, such as jumpers, skiers, cyclists, weight lifters, and soccer players. It is felt as a dull, aching pain around the front of the knee and deep to the patella. The pain may be felt when walking or running, going up or down stairs, kneeling or squatting, or after sitting with the knee bent for an extended period. Patellofemoral syndrome may be initiated by a variety of causes, including individual variations in the shape and movement of the patella, a direct blow to the patella, or flat feet or improper shoes that cause excessive turning in or out of the feet or leg. These factors may cause in an imbalance in the muscle pull that acts on the patella, resulting in an abnormal tracking of the patella that allows it to deviate too far toward the lateral side of the patellar surface on the distal femur. Because the hips are wider than the knee region, the femur has a diagonal orientation within the thigh, in contrast to the vertically oriented tibia of the leg (Figure 8.17). The Q-angle is a measure of how far the femur is angled laterally away from vertical. The Q-angle is normally 10–15 degrees, with females typically having a larger Q-angle due to their wider pelvis. During extension of the knee, the quadriceps femoris muscle pulls the patella both superiorly and laterally, with the lateral pull greater in women due to their large Q-angle. This makes women more vulnerable to developing patellofemoral syndrome than men. Normally, the large lip on the lateral side of the patellar surface of the femur compensates for the lateral pull on the patella, and thus helps to maintain its proper tracking. However, if the pull produced by the medial and lateral sides of the quadriceps femoris muscle is not properly balanced, abnormal tracking of the patella toward the lateral side may occur. With continued use, this produces pain and could result in damage to the articulating surfaces of the patella and femur, and the possible future development of arthritis. Treatment generally involves stopping the activity that produces knee pain for a period of time, followed by a gradual resumption of activity. Proper strengthening of the quadriceps femoris muscle to correct for imbalances is also important to help prevent reoccurrence. 
Molecules in the cell membrane allow it to be semipermeable. The membrane is made of a double layer of phospholipids (a "bilayer") and proteins ( Figure below ). Recall that phospholipids, being lipids, do not mix with water. It is this quality that allows them to form the outside barrier of the cell. 
Objects have the same velocity only if they are moving at the same speed and in the same direction. Objects moving at different speeds, in different directions, or both have different velocities. 
A compound is a substance that consists of two or more elements. A compound has a unique composition that is always the same. The smallest particle of a compound is called a molecule. 
Alloys are mixtures of materials, at least one of which is a metal. 
Unfortunately, maternal mt(DNA)is susceptible to mutations which are a cause of inherited disease, such as breast cancer. Although, it is important to note that most mutations do not lead to defected mtDNA. Heteroplasmy is the presence of a mixture of more than one type of mtDNA. Most people have homoplasmic cells, meaning that their cells contain only normal, undefected mtDNA. However, people with both normal, undefected mtDNA and not normal, defected mtDNA, may inherit mitochondrial diseases. The ultimate condition leading to disease is when the proportion of mutant mtDNA reaches a threshold, after which the cell can no longer cope, resulting in disease. This threshold varies among different tissues and different mutations. 
Summary The concentration of a species in solution can be determined by quantitative analysis. One such method is a titration, in which a measured volume of a solution of one substance, the titrant, is added to a solution of another substance to determine its concentration. The equivalence point in a titration is the point at which exactly enough reactant has been added for the reaction to go to completion. A standard solution, a solution whose concentration is known precisely, is used to determine the concentration of the titrant. Many titrations, especially those that involve acid–base reactions, rely on an indicator. The point at which a color change is observed is the endpoint, which is close to the equivalence point if the indicator is chosen properly. 
Along with the skin, the integumentary system includes the nails and hair. Both the nails and hair contain the tough protein, keratin. The keratin forms fibers, which makes your nails and hair tough and strong. Keratin is similar in toughness to chitin, the carbohydrate found in the exoskeleton of arthropods. 
When fuel is burned, most of the energy is released as heat. Some of this heat can be used to do work. Heat cooks food or warms your house. Sometimes the heat is just waste heat. It still heats the environment, though. 
Paved roads and parking lots prevent rainwater from soaking into the ground. This increases runoff and the potential for soil erosion. 
An electric field is a space around a charged particle where the particle exerts electric force on other charged particles. Because of their force fields, charged particles can exert force on each other without actually touching. Electric fields are generally represented by arrows, as you can see in the Figure below . The arrows show the direction of electric force around a positive particle and a negative particle. For an animated diagram, go to this URL: http://ocw. mit. edu/ans7870/8/8.02T/f04/visualizations/electrostatics/15-CreateField/CreateField_640. mpg. 
Earth science includes many fields of science related to our home planet. 
Gases in the coma and tail of a comet reflect light from the Sun. Comets are very hard to see except when they have comas and tails. That is why they appear only when they are near the Sun. They disappear again as they move back to the outer solar system. 
A mudslide is the sudden flow of mud down a slope because of gravity. Mudslides occur where the soil is mostly clay. Like landslides, mudslides usually occur when the soil is wet. Wet clay forms very slippery mud that slides easily. You can see an example of a mudslide in Figure below . 
one degree Fahrenheit. Only 100 Celsius degrees span the same range as 180 Fahrenheit degrees, thus one degree on the Celsius scale is 1.8 times larger than one degree on the Fahrenheit scale 180 / 100 = 9 / 5. The Kelvin scale is the temperature scale that is commonly used in science. It is an absolute temperature scale defined to have 0 K at the lowest possible temperature, called absolute zero. The official temperature unit on this scale is the kelvin, which is abbreviated K, and is not accompanied by a degree sign. The freezing and boiling points of water are 273.15 K and 373.15 K, respectively. Thus, the magnitude of temperature differences is the same in units of kelvins and degrees Celsius. Unlike other temperature scales, the Kelvin scale is an absolute scale. It is used extensively in scientific work because a number of physical quantities, such as the volume of an ideal gas, are directly related to absolute temperature. The kelvin is the SI unit used in scientific work. 
Igneous rocks are classified first by composition. Categories go from from felsic to ultramafic. Color can indicate composition. 
on a daily basis as a preventive measure. However, aspirin can also lead to serious side effects, including increasing the risk of ulcers. A patient is well advised to consult a physician before beginning any aspirin regimen. A class of drugs collectively known as thrombolytic agents can help speed up the degradation of an abnormal clot. If a thrombolytic agent is administered to a patient within 3 hours following a thrombotic stroke, the patient’s prognosis improves significantly. However, some strokes are not caused by thrombi, but by hemorrhage. Thus, the cause must be determined before treatment begins. Tissue plasminogen activator is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, the primary enzyme that breaks down clots. It is released naturally by endothelial cells but is also used in clinical medicine. New research is progressing using compounds isolated from the venom of some species of snakes, particularly vipers and cobras, which may eventually have therapeutic value as thrombolytic agents. 
Carbon moves through ecosystems in two cycles that overlap. In the biotic cycle, it moves between living things and the air. In the abiotic cycle, it moves between the air, ground, and oceans. By burning fossil fuels, humans have increased the amount of carbon dioxide in the air. 
In biology, energy is required for ecosystems to survive, as all living organisms need energy. Within an organism, energy is needed for growth and development of a biological cell or an organelle within that cell. Energy is also needed for all biochemical reactions within that cell. Therefore, energy is stored within cells in the chemical bonds of substances such as carbohydrates (including sugars), lipids, and proteins. This energy is released during aerobic respiration. 
The volume of a gas increases as the Kelvin temperature increases. 
USDA, photo by Scott Bauer. Deer ticks are the vectors for Lyme disease . public domain. 
Runoff is likely to cause more erosion if the land is bare. Plants help hold the soil in place. The runoff water in Figure below is brown because it eroded soil from a bare, sloping field. Can you find evidence of erosion by runoff where you live? What should you look for?. 
Have your parents ever put corn in the gas tank of their car? They did if they used gas containing ethanol. Ethanol is produced by alcoholic fermentation of the glucose in corn or other plants. This type of fermentation also explains why bread dough rises. Yeasts in bread dough use alcoholic fermentation and produce carbon dioxide gas. The gas forms bubbles in the dough, which cause the dough to expand. The bubbles also leave small holes in the bread after it bakes, making the bread light and fluffy. Do you see the small holes in the slice of bread in Figure below ?. 
The molecular mass is the sum of the masses of the atoms in a molecule. 
Figure 6.11 The frictional force supplies the centripetal force and is numerically equal to it. Centripetal force is perpendicular to velocity and causes uniform circular motion. The larger the F c , the smaller the radius of curvature r and the sharper the curve. The second curve has the same v , but a larger. 
Sphenodontia Sphenodontia (“wedge tooth”) arose in the Mesozoic era and includes only one living genus, Tuatara, comprising two species that are found in New Zealand (Figure 29.26). Tuataras measure up to 80 centimeters and weigh about 1 kilogram. Although quite lizard-like in gross appearance, several unique features of the skull and jaws clearly define them and distinguish the group from the squamates. 
Macroevolution is evolution over geologic time above the level of the species. One of the main topics in macroevolution is how new species arise. The process by which a new species evolves is called speciation . How does speciation occur? How does one species evolve into two or more new species?. 
Conifers Conifers are the dominant phylum of gymnosperms, with the most variety of species. Most are tall trees that usually bear scale-like or needle-like leaves. The thin shape of the needles and their waxy cuticle limits water loss through transpiration. Snow slides easily off needle-shaped leaves, keeping the load light and decreasing breaking of branches. These adaptations to cold and dry weather explain the predominance of conifers at high altitudes and in cold climates. Conifers include familiar evergreen trees, such as pines, spruces, firs, cedars, sequoias, and yews (Figure 14.20). A few species are deciduous and lose their leaves all at once in fall. The European larch and the tamarack are examples of deciduous conifers. Many coniferous trees are harvested for paper pulp and timber. The wood of conifers is more primitive than the wood of angiosperms; it contains tracheids, but no vessel elements, and is referred to as “soft wood. 
Vertebrates reproduce sexually, and almost all of them have separate male and female sexes. Generally, aquatic species have external fertilization, whereas terrestrial species have internal fertilization. Can you think of a reason why aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates differ in this way?. 
Genes are a major determinant of human skin color. However, exposure to ultraviolet radiation can increase the amount of pigment in the skin and make it appear darker. 
Something that is elastic can return to its original shape after being stretched or compressed. This property is called elasticity . As you stretch or compress an elastic material like a bungee cord, it resists the change in shape. It exerts a counter force in the opposite direction. This force is called elastic force . The farther the material is stretched or compressed, the greater the elastic force becomes. As soon as the stretching or compressing force is released, elastic force causes the material to spring back to its original shape. You can watch a demonstration of elastic force at this URL:. 
Fish also have a centralized nervous system with a brain. Fish brains are small compared with the brains of other vertebrates, but they are large and complex compared with the brains of invertebrates. Fish also have highly developed sense organs that allow them to see, hear, feel, smell, and taste. Sharks and some other fish can even sense the very low levels of electricity emitted by other animals. This helps them locate prey. 
The Carboniferous Period : Next, during the Carboniferous Period (360–290 million years ago), widespread forests of huge plants left massive deposits of carbon that eventually turned to coal. The first amphibians evolved to move out of the water and colonize land, but they had to return to the water to reproduce. Soon after amphibians arose, the first reptiles evolved. They were the first animals that could reproduce on dry land. 
Scientists think that protists are the oldest eukaryotes. 
arthropod in Class Insecta that has three body segments, six jointed legs, and multiple head appendages. 
All plants have a characteristic life cycle that includes alternation of generations . Plants alternate between haploid and diploid generations. Alternation of generations allows for both asexual and sexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction with spores produces haploid individuals called gametophytes . Sexual reproduction with gametes and fertilization produces diploid individuals called sporophytes . A typical plant’s life cycle is diagrammed in Figure below . 
Gas Exchange across the Alveoli In the body, oxygen is used by cells of the body’s tissues and carbon dioxide is produced as a waste product. The ratio of carbon dioxide production to oxygen consumption is the respiratory quotient (RQ). RQ varies between 0.7 and 1.0. If just glucose were used to fuel the body, the RQ would equal one. One mole of carbon dioxide would be produced for every mole of oxygen consumed. Glucose, however, is not the only fuel for the body. Protein and fat are also used as fuels for the body. Because of this, less carbon dioxide is produced than oxygen is consumed and the RQ is, on average, about 0.7 for fat and about 0.8 for protein. The RQ is used to calculate the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolar spaces within the lung, the alveolar PO Above, 2 the partial pressure of oxygen in the lungs was calculated to be 150 mm Hg. However, lungs never fully deflate with an exhalation; therefore, the inspired air mixes with this residual air and lowers the partial pressure of oxygen within the alveoli. This means that there is a lower concentration of oxygen in the lungs than is found in the air outside the body. Knowing the RQ, the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli can be calculated:. 
down to supply the blood and other tissues with these minerals. Phosphate is a normal constituent of nucleic acids; hence, blood levels of phosphate will increase whenever nucleic acids are broken down. Excretion of ions occurs mainly through the kidneys, with lesser amounts lost in sweat and in feces. Excessive sweating may cause a significant loss, especially of sodium and chloride. Severe vomiting or diarrhea will cause a loss of chloride and bicarbonate ions. Adjustments in respiratory and renal functions allow the body to regulate the levels of these ions in the ECF. Table 26.1 lists the reference values for blood plasma, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and urine for the six ions addressed in this section. In a clinical setting, sodium, potassium, and chloride are typically analyzed in a routine urine sample. In contrast, calcium and phosphate analysis requires a collection of urine across a 24-hour period, because the output of these ions can vary considerably over the course of a day. Urine values reflect the rates of excretion of these ions. Bicarbonate is the one ion that is not normally excreted in urine; instead, it is conserved by the kidneys for use in the body’s buffering systems. 
Mitosis in the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle. Mitosis is the multi-phase process in which the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell divides. In this diagram, prometaphase is not included as a separate phase, but incorporated into prophase. 
Palatine Bone The palatine bone is one of a pair of irregularly shaped bones that contribute small areas to the lateral walls of the nasal cavity and the medial wall of each orbit. The largest region of each of the palatine bone is the horizontal plate. The plates from the right and left palatine bones join together at the midline to form the posterior quarter of the hard palate (see Figure 7.8a). Thus, the palatine bones are best seen in an inferior view of the skull and hard palate. 
Why do satellites stay in orbit? Why don't they crash into Earth due to the planet's gravity? Newton’s law of universal gravitation describes what happens. Every object in the universe is attracted to every other object. Gravity makes an apple fall to the ground. Gravity also keeps you from floating away into the sky. Gravity holds the Moon in orbit around Earth. It keeps Earth in orbit around the Sun. 
An atom’s protons and electrons carry electrical charges. Protons, with their positive charge, are designated p+. Electrons, which have a negative charge, are designated e–. An atom’s neutrons have no charge: they are electrically neutral. Just as a magnet sticks to a steel refrigerator because their opposite charges attract, the positively charged protons attract the negatively charged electrons. This mutual attraction gives the atom some structural stability. The attraction by the positively charged nucleus helps keep electrons from straying far. The number of protons and electrons within a neutral atom are equal, thus, the atom’s overall charge is balanced. 
At the top of the stratosphere is a thin layer called the stratopause. It acts as a boundary between the stratosphere and the mesosphere. 
Force and electric field are vectors and thus have direction as well as their value. 
Formaldehyde is a gas at room temperature. Acetaldehyde boils at 20°C; in an open vessel, it boils away in a warm room. Most other common aldehydes are liquids at room temperature. 
Mesophyll makes up most of the leaf’s interior. This is where photosynthesis occurs. Mesophyll consists mainly of parenchymal cells with chloroplasts. 
Exposed rocks in desert areas often develop a dark brown or black coating called desert varnish ( Figure below ). Wind transports clay-sized particles that chemically react with other substances at high temperatures. The coating is formed of iron and manganese oxides. 
High levels of nutrients, called eutrophication, can cause conditions that deprive fish of oxygen. 
A bowling ball rolls down a lane at a constant velocity. (e) A car accelerates down the road. There is friction between the tires and the road. 
Figure 8.15 A photosystem consists of a light-harvesting complex and a reaction center. Pigments in the lightharvesting complex pass light energy to two special chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction center. The light excites an electron from the chlorophyll a pair, which passes to the primary electron acceptor. The excited electron must then be replaced. In (a) photosystem II, the electron comes from the splitting of water, which releases oxygen as a waste product. In (b) photosystem I, the electron comes from the chloroplast electron transport chain discussed below. 
Check to see that gas lines are made of flexible material so they do not rupture. Any equipment that uses gas should be well secured. 
Figure 5.2 Layers of Skin The skin is composed of two main layers: the epidermis, made of closely packed epithelial cells, and the dermis, made of dense, irregular connective tissue that houses blood vessels, hair follicles, sweat glands, and other structures. Beneath the dermis lies the hypodermis, which is composed mainly of loose connective and fatty tissues. 
Infiltration is the process by which water soaks into the ground. Some of the water may seep deep underground. Some may stay in the soil, where plants can absorb it with their roots. 
RNA is studied to understand gene expression patterns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable because enzymes that break down RNA are commonly present in nature. Some are even secreted by our own skin and are very difficult to inactivate. Similar to DNA extraction, RNA extraction involves the use of various buffers and enzymes to inactivate other macromolecules and preserve only the RNA. Gel Electrophoresis Because nucleic acids are negatively charged ions at neutral or alkaline pH in an aqueous environment, they can be moved by an electric field. Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate charged molecules on the basis of size and charge. The nucleic acids can be separated as whole chromosomes or as fragments. The nucleic acids are loaded into a slot at one end of a gel matrix, an electric current is applied, and negatively charged molecules are pulled toward the opposite end of the gel (the end with the positive electrode). Smaller molecules move through the pores in the gel faster than larger molecules; this difference in the rate of migration separates the fragments on the basis of size. The nucleic acids in a gel matrix are invisible until they are stained with a compound that allows them to be seen, such as a dye. Distinct fragments of nucleic acids appear as bands at specific distances from the top of the gel (the negative electrode end) that are based on their size (Figure 10.3). A mixture of many fragments of varying sizes appear as a long smear, whereas uncut genomic DNA is usually too large to run through the gel and forms a single large band at the top of the gel. 
Bacteria that cause foodborne illnesses include Salmonella , a bacterium found in many foods, including raw and undercooked meat, poultry, dairy products, and seafood. Campylobacter jejuni is found in raw or undercooked chicken and unpasteurized milk. Several strains of E. coli can cause illnesses, and are found in raw or undercooked hamburger, unpasteurized fruit juices and milk, and even fresh produce. Vibrio is a bacterium that may contaminate fish or shellfish. Listeria has been found in raw and undercooked meats, unpasteurized milk, soft cheeses, and ready-to-eat deli meats and hot dogs. Most of these bacterial illnesses can be prevented with proper cooking of food and washing of hands. 
Sexual reproduction also occurs in virtually all fungi. This involves mating between two haploid hyphae. During mating, two haploid parent cells fuse, forming a diploid spore called a zygospore . The zygospore is genetically different from the parents. After the zygospore germinates, it can undergo meiosis, forming haploid cells that develop into new hyphae. 
Spermatogonia lining the seminiferous tubule undergo mitosis to form primary spermatocytes , which are also diploid. The primary spermatocytes undergo the first meiotic division to form secondary spermatocytes , which are haploid. Spermatocytes make up the next layer of cells inside the seminiferous tubule. Finally, the secondary spermatocytes complete meiosis to form spermatids . Spermatids make up a third layer of cells in the tubule. 
Volcanoes can be active, dormant, or extinct. 
A chemical reaction is a process in which some substances, called reactants, change into different substances, called products. During the reaction, chemical bonds break in the reactants and new chemical bonds form in the products. 
Different radioisotopes may vary greatly in their rate of decay. The more unstable their nuclei are, the faster they decay. 
The mildest and most common type of brain injury is a concussion . This is a bruise on the surface of the brain. It may cause temporary problems such as headache, drowsiness, and confusion. Most concussions in young people occur when they are playing sports, especially contact sports like football. Other sports, like soccer, boxing, baseball, lacrosse, skateboarding, and hockey can also result in concussions. A concussion normally heals on its own in a few days. 
Alkenes can react with halogens to form dihalides. 
The placenta is a spongy mass of blood vessels. Some of the vessels come from the mother. Some come from the fetus. The placenta is attached to the inside of the mother’s uterus. The fetus is connected to the placenta by a tube called the umbilical cord . The cord contains two arteries and a vein. Substances pass back and forth between the mother’s and fetus’s blood through the placenta and cord. Oxygen and nutrients pass from the mother to the fetus. Carbon dioxide passes from the fetus to the mother. 
Nuclear Fission Many heavier elements with smaller binding energies per nucleon can decompose into more stable elements that have intermediate mass numbers and larger binding energies per nucleon—that is, mass numbers and binding energies per nucleon that are closer to the “peak” of the binding energy graph near 56 (see Figure 21.3). Sometimes neutrons are also produced. This decomposition is called fission, the breaking of a large nucleus into smaller pieces. The breaking is rather random with the formation of a large number of different products. Fission usually does not occur naturally, but is induced by bombardment with neutrons. The first reported nuclear fission occurred in 1939 when three German scientists, Lise Meitner, Otto Hahn, and Fritz Strassman, bombarded uranium-235 atoms with slow-moving neutrons that split the U-238 nuclei into smaller fragments that consisted of several neutrons and elements near the middle of the periodic table. Since then, fission has been observed in many other isotopes, including most actinide isotopes that have an odd number of neutrons. A typical nuclear fission reaction is shown in Figure 21.14. 
Next, we identify the least precise measurement: 13.7 kg. This measurement is expressed to the 0.1 decimal place, so our final answer must also be expressed to the 0.1 decimal place. Thus, the answer is rounded to the tenths place, giving us 15.2 kg. Significant Figures in this Text In this text, most numbers are assumed to have three significant figures. Furthermore, consistent numbers of significant figures are used in all worked examples. You will note that an answer given to three digits is based on input good to at least three digits, for example. If the input has fewer significant figures, the answer will also have fewer significant figures. Care is also taken that the number of significant figures is reasonable for the situation posed. In some topics, particularly in optics, more accurate numbers are needed and more than three significant figures will be used. Finally, if a number is exact, such as the two in the formula for the circumference of a circle, c = 2πr , it does not affect the number of significant figures in a calculation. 
The heart is a muscular organ in the chest that consists mainly of cardiac muscle. It pumps blood through blood vessels by repeated, rhythmic contractions. Blood flows through four chambers of the heart when it beats. Heartbeat is controlled by electrical signals from special cells within the heart called the pacemaker. 
A monoprotic acid is an acid that contains only one ionizable hydrogen. Hydrochloric acid and acetic acid are monoprotic acids. A polyprotic acid is an acid that contains multiple ionizable hydrogens. Most common polyprotic acids are either diprotic (such as H 2 SO 4 ) or triprotic (such as H 3 PO 4 ). 
Single-celled organisms do not need blood. They obtain nutrients directly from and excrete wastes directly into their environment. The human organism cannot do that. Our large, complex bodies need blood to deliver nutrients to and remove wastes from our trillions of cells. The heart pumps blood throughout the body in a network of blood vessels. Together, these three components—blood, heart, and vessels—makes up the cardiovascular system. This chapter focuses on the medium of transport: blood. 
The human nerve cell in Figure below is a good example of a specialized animal cell. Its shape suits it for its function of sending nerve signals to other cells. A nerve cell couldn’t take this shape if it were surrounded by a rigid cell wall. 
Galileo’s Experiment Galileo is said to have dropped two objects of different masses from the Tower of Pisa. He measured how long it took each to reach the ground. Since stopwatches weren’t readily available, how do you think he measured their fall time? If the objects were the same size, but with different masses, what do you think he should have observed? Would this result be different if done on the Moon? PhET Explorations: Masses & Springs A realistic mass and spring laboratory. Hang masses from springs and adjust the spring stiffness and damping. You can even slow time. Transport the lab to different planets. A chart shows the kinetic, potential, and thermal energy for each spring. 
The smallest and lightest alcohols (methanol, ethanol, propanol) are completely soluble in water in all proportions. In a solution, the hydroxyl groups of alcohol molecules and the water molecules form hydrogen bonds with each other, resulting in complete miscibility. However, as the length of the carbon chain increases, the solubility decreases. The solubility of 1-butanol is 7.4 g per 100 g of water, while that of 1-pentanol is 2.7 g per 100 g water, and 1-octanol is 0.06 g per 100 g water. The carbon chain portion of the larger alcohol molecule is nonpolar and leads to the decreased solubility of the overall compound. 
Water is involved in many other biochemical reactions. As a result, just about all life processes depend on water. Clearly, life as we know it could not exist without water. 
Insects are capable of a surprising range of behaviors. Most of their behaviors, such as flying and mating, are instinctive. These are behaviors that don’t need to be learned. They are largely controlled by genes. However, some insect behaviors are learned. For example, ants and bees can learn where food is located and keep going back for more. 
6. Mercury is small, rocky and covered with craters. Why?. 
Insects are arthropods in the class Hexapoda. They are the most numerous organisms in the world. 
Drumlins, eskers, and kettle lakes are features made of glacial till. 
The black line represents the straight path of the light itself. Along this path, there exists an electric field that will reach a maximum positive charge, slowly collapse to zero charge, and then expand to a maximum negative charge. Similarly, there is an changing magnetic field that oscillates from maximum north pole field to maximum south pole field. Along the path of the electromagnetic wave, these changing fields repeat, oscillating over and over again. However, the oscillating electric and magnetic fields demonstrate a weaving pattern that is not the way light travels. For an electromagnetic wave, the crests and troughs represent the oscillating fields, not the path of the light. 
Before catalytic converters were required, cars spewed a lot of pollutants into the air. On the left is a car without a catalytic converter. The car on the right has one. 
Lattice energy of an ionic solid is a measure of the strength of bonds in that ionic compound. 
low, the two metals with the highest ionization energies (beryllium and magnesium) do form compounds that exhibit some covalent characters. Like the alkali metals, the heavier alkaline earth metals impart color to a flame. As in the case of the alkali metals, this is part of the emission spectrum of these elements. Calcium and strontium produce shades of red, whereas barium produces a green color. Magnesium is a silver-white metal that is malleable and ductile at high temperatures. Passivation decreases the reactivity of magnesium metal. Upon exposure to air, a tightly adhering layer of magnesium oxycarbonate forms on the surface of the metal and inhibits further reaction. (The carbonate comes from the reaction of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. ) Magnesium is the lightest of the widely used structural metals, which is why most magnesium production is for lightweight alloys. Magnesium (shown in Figure 18.6), calcium, strontium, and barium react with water and air. At room temperature, barium shows the most vigorous reaction. The products of the reaction with water are hydrogen and the metal hydroxide. The formation of hydrogen gas indicates that the heavier alkaline earth metals are better reducing agents (more easily oxidized) than is hydrogen. As expected, these metals react with both acids and nonmetals to form ionic compounds. Unlike most salts of the alkali metals, many of the common salts of the alkaline earth metals are insoluble in water because of the high lattice energies of these compounds, containing a divalent metal ion. 
24.4 | Fungal Parasites and Pathogens By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Describe fungal parasites and pathogens of plants • Describe the different types of fungal infections in humans • Explain why antifungal therapy is hampered by the similarity between fungal and animal cells Parasitism describes a symbiotic relationship in which one member of the association benefits at the expense of the other. Both parasites and pathogens harm the host; however, the pathogen causes a disease, whereas the parasite usually does not. Commensalism occurs when one member benefits without affecting the other. 
Symbiosis is a close relationship between organisms of different species in which at least one of the organisms benefits. The other organism may also benefit, it may be unaffected by the relationship, or it may be harmed by the relationship. Figure below shows an example of symbiosis. The birds in the picture are able to pick out food from the fur of the deer. The deer won't eat the birds. In fact, the deer knowingly lets the birds rest on it. What, if anything, do you think the deer gets out of the relationship?. 
Sponges have an internal skeleton that gives them support and protection. An internal skeleton is called an endoskeleton . A sponge endoskeleton consists of short, sharp rods called spicules (see Figure below ). Spicules are made of silica, calcium carbonate, or spongin, a tough protein. They grow from specialized cells in the body of the sponge. 
Dogs pant to lose excess body heat. 
An antibody matches only one type of antigen. 
Nuclear chemistry is the study of reactions that involve changes in nuclear structure. The chapter on atoms, molecules, and ions introduced the basic idea of nuclear structure, that the nucleus of an atom is composed of protons and, with the exception of 11 H, neutrons. Recall that the number of protons in the nucleus is called the atomic number (Z) of the element, and the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons is the mass number (A). Atoms with the same atomic number but different mass numbers are isotopes of the same element. When referring to a single type of nucleus, we often use the term nuclide and identify it by the notation A where X is the symbol Z X, 14 ⎞ Often a nuclide is referenced 6 C⎠. example, 146 C is called “carbon-14. 
The greatest source of hazardous waste is industry. Agriculture is another major source. Even households produce a lot of hazardous waste. 
Today, scientists think that electrons truly are fundamental particles that cannot be broken down into smaller, simpler particles. They are a type of fundamental particles called leptons. Protons and neutrons, on the other hand, are no longer thought to be fundamental particles. Instead, they are now thought to consist of smaller, simpler particles of matter called quarks. Scientists theorize that leptons and quarks are held together by yet another type of fundamental particles called bosons. All three types of fundamental particles—leptons, quarks, and bosons—are described below. The following Figure below shows the variety of particles of each type. 
matrix and deposit calcium, which hardens the matrix. The non-mineralized portion of the bone or osteoid continues to form around blood vessels, forming spongy bone. Connective tissue in the matrix differentiates into red bone marrow in the fetus. The spongy bone is remodeled into a thin layer of compact bone on the surface of the spongy bone. Endochondral Ossification Endochondral ossification is the process of bone development from hyaline cartilage. All of the bones of the body, except for the flat bones of the skull, mandible, and clavicles, are formed through endochondral ossification. In long bones, chondrocytes form a template of the hyaline cartilage diaphysis. Responding to complex developmental signals, the matrix begins to calcify. This calcification prevents diffusion of nutrients into the matrix, resulting in chondrocytes dying and the opening up of cavities in the diaphysis cartilage. Blood vessels invade the cavities, and osteoblasts and osteoclasts modify the calcified cartilage matrix into spongy bone. Osteoclasts then break down some of the spongy bone to create a marrow, or medullary, cavity in the center of the diaphysis. Dense, irregular connective tissue forms a sheath (periosteum) around the bones. The periosteum assists in attaching the bone to surrounding tissues, tendons, and ligaments. The bone continues to grow and elongate as the cartilage cells at the epiphyses divide. In the last stage of prenatal bone development, the centers of the epiphyses begin to calcify. Secondary ossification centers form in the epiphyses as blood vessels and osteoblasts enter these areas and convert hyaline cartilage into spongy bone. Until adolescence, hyaline cartilage persists at the epiphyseal plate (growth plate), which is the region between the diaphysis and epiphysis that is responsible for the lengthwise growth of long bones (Figure 38.21). 
By far the most common producers use the energy in sunlight to make food. This is called photosynthesis . Producers that photosynthesize include plants and algae. These organisms must live where there is plenty of sunlight. 
The nervous system isn’t the only message-relaying system of the human body. The endocrine system also carries messages. The endocrine system is a system of glands that release chemical messenger molecules into the bloodstream. The messenger molecules are hormones. Hormones act slowly compared with the rapid transmission of electrical messages by the nervous system. They must travel through the bloodstream to the cells they affect, and this takes time. On the other hand, because endocrine hormones are released into the bloodstream, they travel throughout the body. As a result, endocrine hormones can affect many cells and have body-wide effects. 
There are two basic types of cells, prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells . The main difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells is that eukaryotic cells have a nucleus . The nucleus is where cells store their DNA , which is the genetic material. The nucleus is surrounded by a membrane. Prokaryotic cells do not have a nucleus. Instead, their DNA floats around inside the cell. Organisms with prokaryotic cells are called prokaryotes . All prokaryotes are single-celled (unicellular) organisms. Bacteria and Archaea are the only prokaryotes. Organisms with eukaryotic cells are called eukaryotes . Animals, plants, fungi, and protists are eukaryotes. All multicellular organisms are eukaryotes. Eukaryotes may also be single-celled. 
redox reaction will occur. The only question is whether lead will be oxidized to Pb(II) or Pb(IV). Because BrF3 is a powerful oxidant and fluorine is able to stabilize high oxidation states of other elements, it is likely that PbF4 will be the product. The two possible reduction products for BrF3 are BrF and Br2. The actual product will likely depend on the ratio of the reactants used. With excess BrF3, we expect the more oxidized product (BrF). With lower ratios of oxidant to lead, we would probably obtain Br2 as the product. Exercise Predict the products of each reaction and write a balanced chemical equation for each reaction. 
Energy conversion occurs when energy changes from one type or form of energy to another. Energy often changes between potential and kinetic energy. Energy is always conserved during energy conversions. 
Treating genetic disorders is one use of biotechnology. Biotechnology is the use of technology to change the genetic makeup of living things for human purposes. It's also called genetic engineering. Besides treating genetic disorders, biotechnology is used to change organisms so they are more useful to people. 
Chinook winds ( Figure below ) occur when air is forced over a mountain range. Warm air rises over the Sierra Nevada in California, for example, because it is pushed eastward by the westerly winds. The air cools as it rises and precipitates. The air is now dry. It sinks down the far side of the mountains and may create strong winds. These Chinook winds are relatively warm. If there is snow, the winds may melt it quickly. The dry sinking air creates a rainshadow effect . Rainshadow effect is responsible for many of the world's deserts. 
There are two cell types: prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Prokaryotic cells are usually single-celled and smaller than eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells are usually found in multicellular organisms, but there are some single-celled eukaryotes. 
Chlamydia is the most common STI in the United States. As shown in the graph in Figure below , females are much more likely than males to develop chlamydia. Like most STIs, rates of chlamydia are highest in teens and young adults. 
Almost all plants make food by photosynthesis. 
Ingestive protists ingest, or engulf, bacteria and other small particles. They extend their cell wall and cell membrane around the food item, forming a food vacuole. Then enzymes digest the food in the vacuole. 
Energy is the capacity to do work or to produce heat. 
Abundance The elements vary widely in abundance. In the universe as a whole, the most common element is hydrogen (about 90% of atoms), followed by helium (most of the remaining 10%). All other elements are present in relatively minuscule amounts, as far as we can detect. On the planet Earth, however, the situation is rather different. Oxygen makes up 46.1% of the mass of Earth’s crust (the relatively thin layer of rock forming Earth’s surface), mostly in combination with other elements, while silicon makes up 28.5%. Hydrogen, the most abundant element in the universe, makes up only 0.14% of Earth’s crust. Table 2.1 "Elemental Composition of Earth" lists the relative abundances of elements on Earth as a whole and in Earth’s crust. Table 2.2 "Elemental Composition of a Human Body" lists the relative abundances of elements in the human body. If you compare Table 2.1 "Elemental Composition of Earth" and Table 2.2 "Elemental Composition of a Human Body", you will find disparities between the percentage of each element in the human body and on Earth. Oxygen has the highest percentage in both Saylor URL: http://www. saylor. org/books. 
The placenta permits a long period of fetal growth in the uterus. As a result, the fetus can become large and mature before birth. This increases its chances of surviving. 
Most reptiles reproduce sexually and have internal fertilization. Males have one or two penises that pass sperm from their cloaca to the cloaca of a female. Fertilization occurs within the cloaca, and fertilized eggs leave the female’s body through the opening in the cloaca. In a minority of species, the eggs are retained inside the female’s body until they hatch. Then the offspring leave the mother’s body through the cloaca opening. 
Protists are the simplest eukaryotes. They are easiest to define by what they are not. Protists are not animals, plants, or fungi. 
Immunity can also be caused by vaccination. Vaccination is the process of exposing a person to a pathogen on purpose in order to develop immunity. In vaccination, a modified pathogen is usually injected under the skin by a shot. Only part of the pathogen is injected, or a weak or dead pathogen is used. It sounds dangerous, but the shot prepares your body for fighting the pathogen without causing the actual illness. Vaccination triggers an immune response against the injected antigen. The body prepares "memory" cells for use at a later time, in case the antigen is ever encountered again. Essentially, a vaccine imitates an infection, triggering an immune response, without making a person sick. 
Section Summary 11.1 What Is a Fluid? • A fluid is a state of matter that yields to sideways or shearing forces. Liquids and gases are both fluids. Fluid statics is the physics of stationary fluids. 
Another obvious change that occurs during puberty is rapid growth. This is called the adolescent growth spurt . In boys, it is controlled by testosterone. The rate of growth usually starts to increase relatively early in puberty. At its peak rate, growth in height is about 10 centimeters (almost 4 inches) per year in the average male. Growth generally remains rapid for several years. Growth and development of muscles occur toward the end of the growth spurt in height. Muscles may continue to develop and gain strength after growth in height is finished. 
There are two common ways to measure pH. When only an approximate pH value is needed, an inexpensive test involves the use of acid-base indicators , which change color based on the relative acidity of the solution. One type of common indicator is litmus paper. For example, if a piece of litmus paper is dipped into an acidic solution (pH below ~4.5), it will turn red, and dipping it into a basic solution (pH above ~8.5) will turn it blue. Solutions of intermediate pH will result in various shades of purple. Because different indicators change color at different pH values, the use of multiple indicators can generally narrow down the possible pH of a solution to a range of about 0.5-1 pH units. Figure below shows the colors exhibited by various indicators at different pH values. 
The thyroid gland is regulated by a negative feedback loop. The loop includes the hypothalamus and pituitary gland in addition to the thyroid. 
Mike Johnston. Whale sharks are the largest cartilaginous fish . CC BY 2.0. 
The kidneys are responsible for removing excess H+ ions from the blood. If the kidneys fail, what would happen to blood pH and to hemoglobin affinity for oxygen? Factors That Affect Oxygen Binding The oxygen-carrying capacity of hemoglobin determines how much oxygen is carried in the blood. In addition to P O , 2 other environmental factors and diseases can affect oxygen carrying capacity and delivery. Carbon dioxide levels, blood pH, and body temperature affect oxygen-carrying capacity (Figure 39.20). When carbon + dioxide is in the blood, it reacts with water to form bicarbonate (HCO− 3 ) and hydrogen ions (H ). As the level of carbon dioxide in the blood increases, more H+ is produced and the pH decreases. This increase in carbon dioxide and subsequent decrease in pH reduce the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen. The oxygen dissociates from the Hb molecule, shifting the oxygen dissociation curve to the right. Therefore, more oxygen is needed to reach the same hemoglobin saturation level as when the pH was higher. A similar shift in the curve also results from an increase in body temperature. Increased temperature, such as from increased activity of skeletal muscle, causes the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen to be reduced. Diseases like sickle cell anemia and thalassemia decrease the blood’s ability to deliver oxygen to tissues and its oxygencarrying capacity. In sickle cell anemia, the shape of the red blood cell is crescent-shaped, elongated, and stiffened, reducing its ability to deliver oxygen (Figure 39.21). In this form, red blood cells cannot pass through the capillaries. This is painful when it occurs. Thalassemia is a rare genetic disease caused by a defect in either the alpha or the beta subunit of Hb. Patients with thalassemia produce a high number of red blood cells, but these cells have lower-than-normal levels of hemoglobin. Therefore, the oxygen-carrying capacity is diminished. 
Many objects have color because they contain pigments. A pigment is a substance that colors materials by reflecting light of certain wavelengths and absorbing light of other wavelengths. A very common pigment is the dark green pigment called chlorophyll, which is found in plants. Chlorophyll absorbs all but green wavelengths of visible light. Pigments are also found in many manufactured products. They are used to color paints, inks, and dyes. Just three pigments, called primary pigments, can be combined to produce all other colors. The primary colors of pigments are the same as the secondary colors of light: cyan, magenta, and yellow. 
Type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system attacks normal cells of the pancreas. Since the cells in the pancreas are damaged, the pancreas cannot make insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops in childhood or adolescence. 
Enzymes are proteins that speed up biochemical reactions in cells. Antibodies are proteins that target pathogens for destruction. 
Plant-like protists are called algae. They include single-celled diatoms and multicellular seaweed. Like plants, they contain chlorophyll and make food by photosynthesis. Types of algae include red and green algae, euglenids, and dinoflagellates. 
Nitrogen oxides form when nitrogen and oxygen combine at high temperatures. This occurs in hot exhausts from vehicles, factories, and power plants. 
4.4 Muscle Tissue and Motion The three types of muscle cells are skeletal, cardiac, and smooth. Their morphologies match their specific functions in the body. Skeletal muscle is voluntary and responds to conscious stimuli. The cells are striated and multinucleated appearing as long, unbranched cylinders. Cardiac muscle is involuntary and found only in the heart. Each cell is striated with a single nucleus and they attach to one another to form long fibers. Cells are attached to one another at intercalated disks. The cells are interconnected physically and electrochemically to act as a syncytium. Cardiac muscle cells contract autonomously and involuntarily. Smooth muscle is involuntary. Each cell is a spindle-shaped fiber and contains a single nucleus. No striations are evident because the actin and myosin filaments do not align in the cytoplasm. 
Fish were the first vertebrates to evolve. The earliest fish lived in the water, and modern fish are still aquatic. 
Possible problems of the skeletal system include osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, fractures, and sprains. 
The different feeding positions in a food chain or web are called trophic levels. 
Some protists hunt their food or act as parasites. 
Many fungi get organic compounds from living organisms. They have close relationships with other species. A close relationship between two species is called a symbiotic relationship. Two symbiotic relationships in fungi are mycorrhiza and lichen. These relationships are beneficial for both species. 
Electrical Synapse While electrical synapses are fewer in number than chemical synapses, they are found in all nervous systems and play important and unique roles. The mode of neurotransmission in electrical synapses is quite different from that in chemical synapses. In an electrical synapse, the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes are very close together and are actually physically connected by channel proteins forming gap junctions. Gap junctions allow current to pass directly from one cell to the next. In addition to the ions that carry this current, other molecules, such as ATP, can diffuse through the large gap junction pores. There are key differences between chemical and electrical synapses. Because chemical synapses depend on the release of neurotransmitter molecules from synaptic vesicles to pass on their signal, there is an approximately one millisecond delay between when the axon potential reaches the presynaptic terminal and when the neurotransmitter leads to opening of postsynaptic ion channels. Additionally, this signaling is unidirectional. Signaling in electrical synapses, in contrast, is virtually instantaneous (which is important for synapses involved in key reflexes), and some electrical synapses are bidirectional. Electrical synapses are also more reliable as they are less likely to be blocked, and they are important for synchronizing the electrical activity of a group of neurons. For example, electrical synapses in the thalamus are thought to regulate slow-wave sleep, and disruption of these synapses can cause seizures. 
Looking at the magnetism of the seafloor, scientists discovered something astonishing. Many times in Earth’s history, the magnetic poles have switched positions. North becomes south, and south becomes north! When the north and south poles are aligned as they are now, geologists say it is normal polarity . When they are in the opposite position, they say that it is reversed polarity . 
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges in them. In metals, the free charges are free electrons. Figure 20.6 shows how free electrons move through an ordinary conductor. The distance that an individual electron can move between collisions with atoms or other electrons is quite small. The electron paths thus appear nearly random, like the motion of atoms in a gas. But there is an electric field in the conductor that causes the electrons to drift in the direction shown (opposite to the field, since they are negative). The drift velocity v d is the average velocity of the free charges. Drift velocity is quite small, since there are so many free charges. If we have an estimate of the density of free electrons in a conductor, we can calculate the drift velocity for a given current. The larger the density, the lower the velocity required for a given current. 
Polysaccharides A long chain of monosaccharides linked by glycosidic bonds is known as a polysaccharide (poly- = “many”). The chain may be branched or unbranched, and it may contain different types of monosaccharides. The molecular weight may be 100,000 daltons or more depending on the number of monomers joined. Starch, glycogen, cellulose, and chitin are primary examples of polysaccharides. Starch is the stored form of sugars in plants and is made up of a mixture of amylose and amylopectin (both polymers of glucose). Plants are able to synthesize glucose, and the excess glucose, beyond the plant’s immediate energy needs, is stored as starch in different plant parts, including roots and seeds. The starch in the seeds provides food for the embryo as it germinates and can also act as a source of food for humans and animals. The starch that is consumed by humans is broken down by enzymes, such as salivary amylases, into smaller molecules, such as maltose and glucose. The cells can then absorb the glucose. Starch is made up of glucose monomers that are joined by α 1-4 or α 1-6 glycosidic bonds. The numbers 1-4 and 1-6 refer to the carbon number of the two residues that have joined to form the bond. As illustrated in Figure 3.9, amylose is starch formed by unbranched chains of glucose monomers (only α 1-4 linkages), whereas amylopectin is a branched polysaccharide (α 1-6 linkages at the branch points). 
The jejunum is the second part of the small intestine. This is where most nutrients are absorbed into the blood. The inside surface of the jejunum is covered with tiny projections called villi (villus, singular). The villi make the inner surface of the small intestine 1000 times greater than it would be without them. You can read in Figure below how villi are involved in absorption. 
Some of the specialized cells grow short, sharp projections called spicules. Spicules make up the sponge’s internal skeleton, or endoskeleton. The endoskeleton helps to support and protect the sponge. 
The study of viruses is known as virology and people who study viruses are known as virologists . Viruses infect and live inside the cells of living organisms. When viruses infect the cells of their host, they may cause disease. For example, viruses cause AIDS (Acquired immune deficiency syndrome), influenza (flu), chicken pox, and the common cold. Therapy is sometimes difficult for viral diseases. Antibiotics have no effect on viruses and only a few antiviral drugs are available for some diseases. One of the best ways to prevent viral diseases is with a vaccine , which produces immunity . But vaccines are available for only a few diseases. 
Reactants and products are equally abundant at equilibrium. 
Hydrogen bonds also explain why water’s boiling point (100°C) is higher than the boiling points of similar substances without hydrogen bonds. Because of water’s relatively high boiling point, most water exists in a liquid state on Earth. Liquid water is needed by all living organisms. Therefore, the availability of liquid water enables life to survive over much of the planet. 
Digestive enzymes secreted in the acidic environment (low pH) of the stomach help break down proteins into smaller molecules. The main digestive enzyme in the stomach is pepsin , which works best at a pH of about 1.5. These enzymes would not work optimally at other pHs. Trypsin is another enzyme in the digestive system, which breaks protein chains in food into smaller parts. Trypsin works in the small intestine, which is not an acidic environment. Trypsin's optimum pH is about 8. 
The breasts are not directly involved in reproduction, but they nourish a baby after birth. Each breast contains mammary glands, which secrete milk. The milk drains into ducts leading to the nipple. A suckling baby squeezes the milk out of the ducts and through the nipple. 
The Moon has no atmosphere. With no atmosphere, the Moon is not protected from extreme temperatures. The average surface temperature during the day is approximately 107°C (225°F). Daytime temperatures can reach as high as 123°C (253°F). At night, the average temperature drops to -153°C (-243°F). The lowest temperatures measured are as low as -233°C (-397°F). 
The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with an open-end manometer, partially shown to the right. The liquid in the manometer is mercury. Assuming atmospheric pressure is 29.92 in. Hg, determine the pressure of the gas in: (a) torr (b) Pa (c) bar. 
When a chemical reaction occurs, the atoms in the reactants rearrange their chemical bonds to make products. The new arrangement of bonds does not have the same total energy as the bonds in the reactants. Therefore, when chemical reactions occur, there will always be an accompanying energy change. In some reactions, the energy of the products is lower than the energy of the reactants. Thus, in the course of the reaction, the substances lose energy to the surrounding environment. Such reactions are exothermic and can be represented by an energylevel diagram like the one in http://catalog. flatworldknowledge. com/bookhub/reader/2547 gob-ch07_s04_f01. In most cases, the energy is given off as heat (although a few reactions give off energy as light). Figure 7.3 Exothermic Reactions. 
The amount of kinetic energy in a moving object depends directly on its mass and velocity. It can be calculated with the equation: . 
The muscles of the anterior compartment of the thigh flex the thigh and extend the leg. This compartment contains the quadriceps femoris group, which actually comprises four muscles that extend and stabilize the knee. The rectus femoris is on the anterior aspect of the thigh, the vastus lateralis is on the lateral aspect of the thigh, the vastus medialis is on the medial aspect of the thigh, and the vastus intermedius is between the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis and deep to the rectus femoris. The tendon common to all four is the quadriceps tendon (patellar tendon), which inserts into the patella and continues below it as the patellar ligament. The patellar ligament attaches to the tibial tuberosity. In addition to the quadriceps femoris, the sartorius is a band-like muscle that extends from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial side. 
Some pathogens spread through food or water. When harmful bacteria contaminate food, they cause foodborne illness, commonly called food poisoning. An example of a pathogen that spreads through water is the protozoan named Giardia lamblia, described in Table above . It causes a disease called giardiasis. 
Wave refraction either concentrates wave energy or disperses it. In quiet water areas, such as bays, wave energy is dispersed. This allows sand to be deposited. Land that sticks out into the water is eroded by the strong wave energy. The wave energy concentrates its power on the wave-cut cliff . 
15.6 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy • Entropy is the loss of energy available to do work. • Another form of the second law of thermodynamics states that the total entropy of a system either increases or remains constant; it never decreases. • Entropy is zero in a reversible process; it increases in an irreversible process. • The ultimate fate of the universe is likely to be thermodynamic equilibrium, where the universal temperature is constant and no energy is available to do work. • Entropy is also associated with the tendency toward disorder in a closed system. 
When done regularly, aerobic activities, such as cycling, make the heart stronger. Other aerobic activities include mowing lawn, shoveling snow and cross country skiing. 
Ground tissue makes up most of the interior of a plant. It carries out basic metabolic functions and stores food and water. 
Polar tundra climates occur near the poles. Tundra climates have permafrost. Permafrost is layer of ground below the surface that is always frozen, even in the summer. Only small plants, such as mosses, can grow in this climate. 
From Genotype to Phenotype Each human body cell has a full complement of DNA stored in 23 pairs of chromosomes. Figure 28.24 shows the pairs in a systematic arrangement called a karyotype. Among these is one pair of chromosomes, called the sex chromosomes, that determines the sex of the individual (XX in females, XY in males). The remaining 22 chromosome pairs are called autosomal chromosomes. Each of these chromosomes carries hundreds or even thousands of genes, each of which codes for the assembly of a particular protein—that is, genes are “expressed” as proteins. An individual’s complete genetic makeup is referred to as his or her genotype. The characteristics that the genes express, whether they are physical, behavioral, or biochemical, are a person’s phenotype. You inherit one chromosome in each pair—a full complement of 23—from each parent. This occurs when the sperm and oocyte combine at the moment of your conception. Homologous chromosomes—those that make up a complementary pair—have genes for the same characteristics in the same location on the chromosome. Because one copy of a gene, an allele, is inherited from each parent, the alleles in these complementary pairs may vary. Take for example an allele that encodes for dimples. A child may inherit the allele encoding for dimples on the chromosome from the father and the allele that encodes for smooth skin (no dimples) on the chromosome from the mother. 
Biochemical reactions are chemical reactions that take place inside living things. Two of the most important biochemical reactions are photosynthesis and cellular respiration. 
Flying birds are divided into 29 orders. The most common orders include landfowl, waterfowl, shorebirds, diurnal and nocturnal raptors, parrots, and perching birds. 
What makes the heart form during development? What makes the skin form? What makes a structure become an arm instead of a leg? These processes occur during development because of a highly specific pattern of gene expression. This intensely regulated pattern of gene expression turns genes on in the right cell at the right time, such that the resulting proteins can perform their necessary functions to ensure proper development. Transcription factors play an extremely important role during development. Many of these proteins can be considered master regulatory proteins , in the sense that they either activate or deactivate the transcription of other genes and, in turn, these secondary gene products can regulate the expression of still other genes in a regulatory cascade. Homeobox genes and gap genes are important classes of transcription factors utilized during development. 
fibers, films, plastics, semisolid resins, and rubbers are also polymers. More than half the compounds produced by the chemical industry are synthetic polymers. Some common addition polymers are listed in http://catalog. flatworldknowledge. com/bookhub/reader/2547 - gob-ch13_s05_t01. Note that all the monomers have carbon-to-carbon double bonds. Many polymers are mundane (e. , plastic bags, food wrap, toys, and tableware), but there are also polymers that conduct electricity, have amazing adhesive properties, or are stronger than steel but much lighter in weight. Table 13.2 Some Addition Polymers. 
The metallic bonding model explains the physical properties of metals. Metals conduct electricity and heat very well because of their free-flowing electrons. As electrons enter one end of a piece of metal, an equal number of electrons flow outward from the other end. When light is shone on to the surface of a metal, its electrons absorb small amounts of energy and become excited into one of its many empty orbitals. The electrons immediately fall back down to lower energy levels and emit light. This process is responsible for the high luster of metals. 
This tissue includes several types of specialized cells. Pavement cells, large, irregularly shaped parenchymal cells which lack chloroplasts, make up the majority of the epidermis. Within the epidermis, thousands of pairs of bean-shaped schlerenchymal guard cells swell and shrink by osmosis to open and close stomata , tiny pores which control the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide gases and the release of water vapor. The lower surfaces of some leaves contain as many as 100,000 stomata per square centimeter. 
A trophic level is a feeding position in a food chain or food web. Most food chains and webs have a maximum of four trophic levels. There is less energy and biomass at higher trophic levels. 
Within the microsporangium, the microspore mother cell divides by meiosis to give rise to four microspores, each of which will ultimately form a pollen grain (Figure 32.7). An inner layer of cells, known as the tapetum, provides nutrition to the developing microspores and contributes key components to the pollen wall. Mature pollen grains contain two cells: a generative cell and a pollen tube cell. The generative cell is contained within the larger pollen tube cell. Upon germination, the tube cell forms the pollen tube through which the generative cell migrates to enter the ovary. During its transit inside the pollen tube, the generative cell divides to form two male gametes (sperm cells). Upon maturity, the microsporangia burst, releasing the pollen grains from the anther. 
Valence electrons are the outer-shell electrons of an atom. 
Gases mix homogeneously when confined to same container. When several gases are added to a container, the individual gas particles mix freely, forming a homogeneous mixture in which each type of gas is randomly distributed throughout all the available volume. 
Viruses are not affected by antibiotics. Several viral diseases can be treated with antiviral drugs or prevented with vaccines. 
Figure 19.24 Coral is the foundation species of coral reef ecosystems. (credit: Jim E. Maragos, USFWS). 
Nutrients A nutrient is a substance in foods and beverages that is essential to human survival. The three basic classes of nutrients are water, the energy-yielding and body-building nutrients, and the micronutrients (vitamins and minerals). The most critical nutrient is water. Depending on the environmental temperature and our state of health, we may be able to survive for only a few days without water. The body’s functional chemicals are dissolved and transported in water, and the chemical reactions of life take place in water. Moreover, water is the largest component of cells, blood, and the fluid between cells, and water makes up about 70 percent of an adult’s body mass. Water also helps regulate our internal temperature and cushions, protects, and lubricates joints and many other body structures. The energy-yielding nutrients are primarily carbohydrates and lipids, while proteins mainly supply the amino acids that are the building blocks of the body itself. You ingest these in plant and animal foods and beverages, and the digestive system breaks them down into molecules small enough to be absorbed. The breakdown products of carbohydrates and lipids can then be used in the metabolic processes that convert them to ATP. Although you might feel as if you are starving after missing a single meal, you can survive without consuming the energy-yielding nutrients for at least several weeks. Water and the energy-yielding nutrients are also referred to as macronutrients because the body needs them in large amounts. In contrast, micronutrients are vitamins and minerals. These elements and compounds participate in many essential chemical reactions and processes, such as nerve impulses, and some, such as calcium, also contribute to the body’s structure. Your body can store some of the micronutrients in its tissues, and draw on those reserves if you fail to consume them in your diet for a few days or weeks. Some others micronutrients, such as vitamin C and most of the B vitamins, are water-soluble and cannot be stored, so you need to consume them every day or two. 
Sublimation and Deposition Some solids can transition directly into the gaseous state, bypassing the liquid state, via a process known as sublimation. At room temperature and standard pressure, a piece of dry ice (solid CO2) sublimes, appearing to gradually disappear without ever forming any liquid. Snow and ice sublime at temperatures below the melting point of water, a slow process that may be accelerated by winds and the reduced atmospheric pressures at high altitudes. When solid iodine is warmed, the solid sublimes and a vivid purple vapor forms (Figure 10.27). The reverse of sublimation is called deposition, a process in which gaseous substances condense directly into the solid state, bypassing the liquid state. The formation of frost is an example of deposition. 
Electron configurations are a shorthand method of indicating what subshells electrons occupy in atoms. 
People pollute water when they apply excess chemicals to their lawn. They may also dispose of pollutants incorrectly. 
CHAPTER SUMMARY 11.1 Discovering How Populations Change Evolution by natural selection arises from three conditions: individuals within a species vary, some of those variations are heritable, and organisms have more offspring than resources can support. The consequence is that individuals with relatively advantageous variations will be more likely to survive and have higher reproductive rates than those individuals with different traits. The advantageous traits will be passed on to offspring in greater proportion. Thus, the trait will have higher representation in the next and subsequent generations leading to genetic change in the population. The modern synthesis of evolutionary theory grew out of the reconciliation of Darwin’s, Wallace’s, and Mendel’s thoughts on evolution and heredity. Population genetics is a theoretical framework for describing evolutionary change in populations through the change in allele frequencies. Population genetics defines evolution as a change in allele frequency over generations. In the absence of evolutionary forces allele frequencies will not change in a population; this is known as Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium principle. However, in all populations, mutation, natural selection, genetic drift, and migration act to change allele frequencies. 
Radioactivity involves the spontaneous emission of material and/or energy from the nucleus of an atom. The most common radioactive atoms have high atomic numbers and contain a large excess of neutrons. Some typical radioactive elements are technetium (atomic number 43), promethium (atomic number 61), and all elements atomic number 84 (polonium) and higher. There are four primary types of emission, either involving the release of a particle from the nucleus or the release of energy. In many instances, both energy and a particle are produced by the radioactive event. 
Early researchers in radioactivity found that the emissions from radioactivity could be classified into three distinct types according to their penetrating power. One type of radiation could barely penetrate a sheet of paper. The second type could pass through as much as 3 mm of aluminum. The third type was extremely penetrating and could pass through several centimeters of lead. They named these three types of radiation alpha , beta , and gamma respectively. Eventually, each type of radiation was further identified. Alpha particles are the nuclei of helium atoms, . Beta particles are electrons, and gamma rays are very high energy photons (even higher energy than x-rays). 
Nuclear Fuels Nuclear fuel consists of a fissionable isotope, such as uranium-235, which must be present in sufficient quantity to provide a self-sustaining chain reaction. In the United States, uranium ores contain from 0.05–0.3% of the uranium oxide U3O8; the uranium in the ore is about 99.3% nonfissionable U-238 with only 0.7% fissionable U-235. Nuclear reactors require a fuel with a higher concentration of U-235 than is found in nature; it is normally enriched to have about 5% of uranium mass as U-235. At this concentration, it is not possible to achieve the supercritical mass necessary for a nuclear explosion. Uranium can be enriched by gaseous diffusion (the only method currently used in the US), using a gas centrifuge, or by laser separation. In the gaseous diffusion enrichment plant where U-235 fuel is prepared, UF6 (uranium hexafluoride) gas at low pressure moves through barriers that have holes just barely large enough for UF6 to pass through. The slightly lighter 235UF6 molecules diffuse through the barrier slightly faster than the heavier 238UF6 molecules. This process is repeated through hundreds of barriers, gradually increasing the concentration of 235UF6 to the level needed by the nuclear reactor. The basis for this process, Graham’s law, is described in the chapter on gases. The enriched UF6 gas is collected, cooled until it solidifies, and then taken to a fabrication facility where it is made into fuel assemblies. Each fuel assembly consists of fuel rods that contain many thimble-sized, ceramic-encased, enriched uranium (usually UO2) fuel pellets. Modern nuclear reactors may contain as many as 10 million fuel pellets. The amount of energy in each of these pellets is equal to that in almost a ton of coal or 150 gallons of oil. 
If a substance is corrosive, it can eat through objects. Many scientists have to work with chemicals that are corrosive or otherwise dangerous. That's one reason that following safety precautions in the laboratory or field is very important. 
Summary A minimum energy (activation energy, Ea) is required for a collision between molecules to result in a chemical reaction. Plots of potential energy for a system versus the reaction coordinate show an energy barrier that must be overcome for the reaction to occur. The arrangement of atoms at the highest point of this barrier is the activated complex, or transition state, of the reaction. At a given temperature, the higher the Ea, the slower the reaction. The fraction of orientations that result in a reaction is the steric factor. The frequency factor, steric factor, and activation energy are related to the rate constant in the Arrhenius equation:  k = Ae - Ea / RT. A plot of the natural logarithm of k versus 1/T is a straight line with a slope of −Ea/R. Saylor URL: http://www. saylor. org/books. 
Nuclear power is clean. It does not pollute the air. However, the use of nuclear energy does create other environmental problems. Uranium must be mined ( Figure below ). The process of splitting atoms creates radioactive waste. This waste may be dangerous for thousands or hundreds of thousands of years. As yet, there is no long-term solution for storing the radioactive waste. 
The average kinetic energy of the molecules is proportional to the temperature of the sample. 
Prokaryotic cells are cells that lack a nucleus. The DNA in prokaryotic cells is in the cytoplasm, rather than enclosed within a nuclear membrane. All the organisms in the Bacteria and Archaea Domains have prokaryotic cells. No other organisms have this type of cell. Organisms with prokaryotic cells are called prokaryotes . They are all single-celled organisms. They were the first type of organisms to evolve. They are still the most numerous organisms today. 
In the modern periodic table, elements are organized by atomic number. The atomic number is the number of protons in an atom of an element. This number is unique for each element, so it seems like an obvious way to organize the elements. (Mendeleev used atomic mass instead of atomic number because protons had not yet been discovered when he made his table. ) In the modern table, atomic number increases from left to right across each period. It also increases from top to bottom within each group. How is this like Mendeleev’s table?. 
Temperature is the average kinetic energy of particles of matter. 
Bird beaks are generally adapted for the food they eat. For example, the sharp, hooked beak of a raptor is well suited for killing and tearing apart prey. The long beak of the hummingbird in Figure below co-evolved with the tube-shaped flowers from which it sips nectar. 
Binary fission occurs when a parent cell simply splits into two daughter cells. This method is described in detail in the lesson "Cell Division. " Bacteria reproduce this way. You can see a bacterial cell reproducing by binary fission in Figure below . 
Intraspecific competition happens when members of the same species compete for the same resources. For example, two trees may grow close together and compete for light. One may out-compete the other by growing taller to get more available light. As members of the same species are usually genetically different, they have different characteristics, and in this example, one tree grows taller than the other. The organism that is better adapted to that environment is better able to survive. The other organism may not survive. In this example, it is the taller tree that is better adapted to the environment. 
6.1 | The Genome By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Describe the prokaryotic and eukaryotic genome • Distinguish between chromosomes, genes, and traits The continuity of life from one cell to another has its foundation in the reproduction of cells by way of the cell cycle. The cell cycle is an orderly sequence of events in the life of a cell from the division of a single parent cell to produce two new daughter cells, to the subsequent division of those daughter cells. The mechanisms involved in the cell cycle are highly conserved across eukaryotes. Organisms as diverse as protists, plants, and animals employ similar steps. 
Friction is a force that opposes motion. Any two objects in contact have what is called a mutual coefficient of friction. To find the force of friction between them, we multiply the normal force by this coefficient. Like the forces above, it arises due to electromagnetic interactions of atoms in two objects. There are actually two coefficients of friction: static and kinetic. Static friction will oppose initial motion of two objects relative to each other. Once the objects are moving, however, kinetic friction will oppose their continuing motion. Kinetic friction is lower than static friction, so it is easier to keep an object in motion than to set it in motion. There are some things about friction that are not very intuitive:. 
Normally, electric charge is transferred when electrons leave the outer orbits of the atoms of one body (leaving it positively charged) and move to the surface of another body (causing the new surface to gain a negative net charge). In a plasma all electrons are stripped from the atoms, leaving positively charged ions and free electrons. 
The geometry of the BF 3 molecule is called trigonal planar . The fluorine atoms are positioned at the vertices of an equilateral triangle. The F-B-F angle is 120°, and all four atoms lie in the same plane. 
Respiration that occurs without lungs. Insects have a system of internal tubes and sacs that oxygen travels through to reach body tissues. Air is taken in through the spiracles , openings on the sides of the abdomen. 
There are also bacteria that use chemical processes to produce food. They get their energy from sources other than the sun, but they are still called producers. This process is known as chemosynthesis , and is common in ecosystems without sunlight, such as certain marine ecosystems. 
The moment magnitude scale is the favored method of measuring earthquake magnitudes. It measures the total energy released by an earthquake. Moment magnitude is calculated by two things. One is the length of the fault break. The other is the distance the ground moves along the fault. 
Mammals breathe with the help of a diaphragm. This is the large muscle that extends across the bottom of the chest below the lungs. When the diaphragm contracts, it increases the volume of the chest. This decreases pressure on the lungs and allows air to flow in. When the diaphragm relaxes, it decreases the volume of the chest. This increases pressure on the lungs and forces air out. 
Haumea is the third-brightest Kuiper belt object. Haumea has two moons. Haumea's odd oval shape is probably caused by its extremely rapid rotation. It rotates in just less than 4 hours! Like other Kuiper belt objects, Haumea is covered by ice. Its density is similar to Earth’s Moon, at 2.6 – 3.3 g/cm 3 . This means that most of Haumea is rocky. 
The kidneys filter blood and form urine. They are part of the urinary system, which also includes the ureters, bladder, and urethra. 
Glaciers form only on land because water is too warm. When a glacier flows into water, it usually breaks up into icebergs. Those icebergs eventually melt into the water. 
This animation (http://openstaxcollege. org/l/insulin) describe the role of insulin and the pancreas in diabetes. Impaired insulin function can lead to a condition called diabetes mellitus, the main symptoms of which are illustrated in Figure 37.10. This can be caused by low levels of insulin production by the beta cells of the pancreas, or by reduced sensitivity of tissue cells to insulin. This prevents glucose from being absorbed by cells, causing high levels of blood glucose, or hyperglycemia (high sugar). High blood glucose levels make it difficult for the kidneys to recover all the glucose from nascent urine, resulting in glucose being lost in urine. High glucose levels also result in less water being reabsorbed by the kidneys, causing high amounts of urine to be produced; this may result in dehydration. Over time, high blood glucose levels can cause nerve damage to the eyes and peripheral body tissues, as well as damage to the kidneys and cardiovascular system. Oversecretion of insulin can cause hypoglycemia, low blood glucose levels. This causes insufficient glucose availability to cells, often leading to muscle weakness, and can sometimes cause unconsciousness or death if left untreated. 
Hypersensitivities Maladaptive immune responses toward harmless foreign substances or self antigens that occur after tissue sensitization are termed hypersensitivities. The types of hypersensitivities include immediate, delayed, and autoimmunity. A large proportion of the population is affected by one or more types of hypersensitivity. Allergies The immune reaction that results from immediate hypersensitivities in which an antibody-mediated immune response occurs within minutes of exposure to a harmless antigen is called an allergy. In the United States, 20 percent of the population exhibits symptoms of allergy or asthma, whereas 55 percent test positive against one or more allergens. Upon initial exposure to a potential allergen, an allergic individual synthesizes antibodies of the IgE class via the typical process of APCs presenting processed antigen to TH cells that stimulate B cells to produce IgE. This class of antibodies also mediates the immune response to parasitic worms. The constant domain of the IgE molecules interact with mast cells embedded in connective tissues. This process primes, or sensitizes, the tissue. Upon subsequent exposure to the same allergen, IgE molecules on mast cells bind the antigen via their variable domains and stimulate the mast cell to release the modified amino acids histamine and serotonin; these chemical mediators then recruit eosinophils which mediate allergic responses. Figure 42.26 shows an example of an allergic response to ragweed pollen. The effects of an allergic reaction range from mild. 
Earth’s magnetic poles have switched places repeatedly in the past. As you can see in the Figure below , each time the switch occurred, Earth’s magnetic field was reversed. The magnetic field is the region around a magnet over which it exerts magnetic force. We think of today’s magnetic field direction as “normal,” but that’s only because it’s what we’re used to. You can watch a simulation of a magnetic field reversal at this URL: http://www. pbs. org/wgbh/nova/earth/when-our-magnetic-field-flips. html. 
Microwaves are used for cell phones and radar. 
A proton is one of three main particles that make up the atom. The other two particles are the neutron and electron. Protons are found in the nucleus of the atom. This is a tiny, dense region at the center of the atom. Protons have a positive electrical charge of one (+1) and a mass of 1 atomic mass unit (amu), which is about 1.67 × 10 -27 kilograms. Together with neutrons, they make up virtually all of the mass of an atom. For an excellent video on protons and other fundamental particles in atoms, go to this URL:. 
Controlling muscles and maintaining balance are just two of the roles of the nervous system. The nervous system also lets you:. 
42.3 | Antibodies By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Explain cross-reactivity • Describe the structure and function of antibodies • Discuss antibody production An antibody, also known as an immunoglobulin (Ig), is a protein that is produced by plasma cells after stimulation by an antigen. Antibodies are the functional basis of humoral immunity. Antibodies occur in the blood, in gastric and mucus secretions, and in breast milk. Antibodies in these bodily fluids can bind pathogens and mark them for destruction by phagocytes before they can infect cells. 
13.2 Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders The number, size, shape, and banding pattern of chromosomes make them easily identifiable in a karyogram and allows for the assessment of many chromosomal abnormalities. Disorders in chromosome number, or aneuploidies, are typically lethal to the embryo, although a few trisomic genotypes are viable. Because of X inactivation, aberrations in sex chromosomes typically have milder phenotypic effects. Aneuploidies also include instances in which segments of a chromosome are duplicated or deleted. Chromosome structures may also be rearranged, for example by inversion or translocation. Both of these aberrations can result in problematic phenotypic effects. Because they force chromosomes to assume unnatural topologies during meiosis, inversions and translocations are often associated with reduced fertility because of the likelihood of nondisjunction. 
Pure carbon can form different types of crystals. Crystalline forms of carbon include diamond, graphite, and fullerenes. 
Another type of luminescence is called electroluminescence. In this process, a substance gives off light when an electric current passes through it. Gases such as neon, argon, and krypton produce light by this means. The car dash lights in the Figure below are produced by electroluminescence. 
Mendel summarized his findings in two laws: the Law of Segregation and the Law of Independent Assortment. The Law of Segregation is based on his findings from his first set of experiments. Mendel stated that heritable factors are segregated during gamete formation. More precisely, this law states that a pair of alleles is separated, or segregated, during the formation of gametes. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes are randomly separated. Each resulting gamete has an equal probability or chance of receiving either of the two alleles. In other words, each gamete has only one allele for each gene. 
Figure 12.27 The Synapse The synapse is a connection between a neuron and its target cell (which is not necessarily a neuron). The presynaptic element is the synaptic end bulb of the axon where Ca2+ enters the bulb to cause vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release. The neurotransmitter diffuses across the synaptic cleft to bind to its receptor. The neurotransmitter is cleared from the synapse either by enzymatic degradation, neuronal reuptake, or glial reuptake. 
An asteroid can only change due to a collision. A collision may cause the asteroid to break up. It may create craters on the asteroid’s surface. An asteroid may strike a planet if it comes near enough to be pulled in by its gravity. 
Unit cells occur in many different varieties. As one example, the cubic crystal system is composed of three different types of unit cells: (1) simple cubic , (2) face-centered cubic , and (3) body-centered cubic . These are shown in three different ways in the Figure below . 
An ionic compound contains positive and negative ions. 
22.10 Protozoa As heterotrophs, protozoa scavenge materials from their surroundings. Others are predators which actively hunt or ambush small organisms such as bacteria and other protozoa for a source of nutrition. Protozoa can be parasitic as well; they may live inside larger organisms, like humans. Most protozoa live as single cells, although a few form colonies. Protozoa are generally difficult to identify due to their varied shape. They may appear as jelly-like blobs, spherical sunbursts, or a flattened leaf. Tiny blood parasites may be only 2 μm long. On the other hand, shell-covered marine may be 5 cm or more in diameter. Furthermore, different protozoans have their own complex life cycles. The complexity has led certain organisms to be mistakenly classified for other species. Nevertheless, protozoa can move, and so, they are classified based on their methods of locomotion. Characteristics of Protozoa : • About 30,000 species known • About 10,000 species are pathogenic, including some of the worst human diseases • heterotrophic • highly variable in form and life cycle. 
Many transition metals and their compounds are used as catalysts. Given MnO 2, FeCl3, Pt, and Ni, which would you select for each purpose and why?. 
Male Reproductive Structures. Organs of the male reproductive system include the penis, testes, and epididymis. Several ducts and glands are also part of the system. Do you know the reproductive functions of any of these structures?. 
The visceral mass in the shelled species is characteristically twisted and the foot is modified for crawling. Most gastropods bear a head with tentacles that support eyes. A complex radula is used to scrape food particles from the substrate. The mantle cavity encloses the ctenidia as well as a pair of nephridia. The class Cephalopoda (“head foot” animals) includes octopuses, squids, cuttlefish, and nautilus. Cephalopods include shelled and reduced-shell groups. They display vivid coloration, typically seen in squids and octopuses, which is used for camouflage. The ability of some octopuses to rapidly adjust their colors to mimic a background pattern or to startle a predator is one of the more awe-inspiring feats of these animals. All animals in this class are predators and have beaklike jaws. All cephalopods have a well-developed nervous system, complex eyes, and a closed circulatory system. The foot is lobed and developed into tentacles and a funnel, which is used for locomotion. Suckers are present on the tentacles in octopuses and squid. Ctenidia are enclosed in a large mantle cavity and are serviced by large blood vessels, each with its own heart. Cephalopods (Figure 15.27) are able to move quickly via jet propulsion by contracting the mantle cavity to forcefully eject a stream of water. Cephalopods have separate sexes, and the females of some species care for the eggs for an extended period of time. Although the shell is much reduced and internal in squid and cuttlefish, and absent altogether in octopus, nautilus live inside a spiral, multi-chambered shell that is filled with gas or water to regulate buoyancy. 
As the tectonic plates move above a hot spot, they form a chain of volcanoes. The islands of Hawaii formed over a hot spot in the middle of the Pacific plate. The Hawaii hot spot has been active for tens of millions of years. The volcanoes of the Hawaiian Islands formed at this hot spot. Older volcanoes that formed at the hot spot have eroded below sea level. These are called the Emperor Seamounts. 
4. State how phagocytosis helps defend the body from pathogens. 
Dietary proteins are broken down during digestion to provide the amino acids needed for protein synthesis. Any extra proteins in the diet not needed for this purpose are used for energy or stored as fat. One gram of proteins provides 4 Calories of energy. 
Most allergies can be treated with medicines. Medicines used to treat allergies include antihistamines and corticosteroids. These medicines help control the immune system when it attacks an allergen. Sometimes, allergies cause severe symptoms, a condition known as anaphylaxis‎. For example, they may cause the throat to swell so it is hard to breathe. Severe allergies may be life threatening. They require emergency medical care. 
Neural Controls The walls of the alimentary canal contain a variety of sensors that help regulate digestive functions. These include mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, and osmoreceptors, which are capable of detecting mechanical, chemical, and osmotic stimuli, respectively. For example, these receptors can sense when the presence of food has caused the stomach to expand, whether food particles have been sufficiently broken down, how much liquid is present, and the type of nutrients in the food (lipids, carbohydrates, and/or proteins). Stimulation of these receptors provokes an appropriate reflex that furthers the process of digestion. This may entail sending a message that activates the glands that secrete digestive juices into the lumen, or it may mean the stimulation of muscles within the alimentary canal, thereby activating peristalsis and segmentation that move food along the intestinal tract. The walls of the entire alimentary canal are embedded with nerve plexuses that interact with the central nervous system and other nerve plexuses—either within the same digestive organ or in different ones. These interactions prompt several types of reflexes. Extrinsic nerve plexuses orchestrate long reflexes, which involve the central and autonomic nervous systems and work in response to stimuli from outside the digestive system. Short reflexes, on the other hand, are orchestrated by intrinsic nerve plexuses within the alimentary canal wall. These two plexuses and their connections were introduced earlier as the enteric nervous system. Short reflexes regulate activities in one area of the digestive tract and may coordinate local peristaltic movements and stimulate digestive secretions. For example, the sight, smell, and taste of food initiate long reflexes that begin with a sensory neuron delivering a signal to the medulla oblongata. The response to the signal is to. 
Untreated diabetes may damage capillaries in the kidneys so the nephrons can no longer filter blood. This is called kidney failure. The only cure for kidney failure is to receive a healthy transplanted kidney from a donor. Until that happens, a patient with kidney failure can be kept alive by artificially filtering the blood through a machine. This is called hemodialysis. You can see how it works in Figure below . 
Ecologists look at many factors that help to describe a population. First, ecologists can measure the number of individuals that make up the population, known as population size . They can then determine the population density , which is the number of individuals of the same species in an area. Population density can be expressed as number per area , such as 20 mice/acre, or 50 rabbits/square mile. 
Biotic factors are the parts of the environment that are alive, or were alive and then died, such as plants, animals, and their remains. Biotic factors also include bacteria, fungi and protists. 
The plasma membrane is composed mainly of phospholipids, which consist of fatty acids and alcohol. The phospholipids in the plasma membrane are arranged in two layers, called a phospholipid bilayer . As shown in Figure below , each phospholipid molecule has a head and two tails. The head “loves” water (hydrophilic) and the tails “hate” water (hydrophobic). The water-hating tails are on the interior of the membrane, whereas the water-loving heads point outwards, toward either the cytoplasm or the fluid that surrounds the cell. 
Atomic radii have been measured for elements. The units for atomic radii are picometers, equal to 10 -12 meters. As an example, the internuclear distance between the two hydrogen atoms in an H 2 molecule is measured to be 74 pm. Therefore, the atomic radius of a hydrogen atom is . 
Birds have a large brain relative to the size of their body. Not surprisingly, the part of the brain that controls flight is the most developed part. The large brain size of birds is also reflected by their high level of intelligence and complex behavior. In fact, birds such as crows and ravens may be more intelligent than many mammals. They are smart enough to use objects such as twigs for tools. They also demonstrate planning and cooperation. Most birds have a poor sense of smell, but they make up for it with their excellent sense of sight. Predatory birds have especially good eyesight. Hawks, for example, have vision that is eight times sharper than human vision. 
Nervous System Anosmia is the loss of the sense of smell. It is often the result of the olfactory nerve being severed, usually because of blunt force trauma to the head. The sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium have a limited lifespan of approximately one to four months, and new ones are made on a regular basis. The new neurons extend their axons into the CNS by growing along the existing fibers of the olfactory nerve. The ability of these neurons to be replaced is lost with age. Age-related anosmia is not the result of impact trauma to the head, but rather a slow loss of the sensory neurons with no new neurons born to replace them. Smell is an important sense, especially for the enjoyment of food. There are only five tastes sensed by the tongue, and two of them are generally thought of as unpleasant tastes (sour and bitter). The rich sensory experience of food is the result of odor molecules associated with the food, both as food is moved into the mouth, and therefore passes under the nose, and when it is chewed and molecules are released to move up the pharynx into the posterior nasal cavity. Anosmia results in a loss of the enjoyment of food. As the replacement of olfactory neurons declines with age, anosmia can set in. Without the sense of smell, many sufferers complain of food tasting bland. Often, the only way to enjoy food is to add seasoning that can be sensed on the tongue, which usually means adding table salt. The problem with this solution, however, is that this increases sodium intake, which can lead to cardiovascular problems through water retention and the associated increase in blood pressure. 
A solid is like a liquid in that particles are in contact with each other. Solids are unlike liquids in that the intermolecular forces are strong enough to hold the particles in place. At low enough temperatures, all substances are solids (helium is the lone exception), but the temperature at which the solid state becomes the stable phase varies widely among substances, from 20 K (−253°C) for hydrogen to over 3,900 K (3,600°C) for carbon. The solid phase has several characteristics. First, solids maintain their shape. They do not fill their entire containers like gases do, and they do not adopt the shape of their containers like liquids do. They cannot be easily compressed like gases can, and they have relatively high densities. Solids may also demonstrate a variety of properties. For example, many metals can be beaten into thin sheets or drawn into wires, while compounds such as NaCl will shatter if they are struck. Some metals, such as sodium and potassium, are rather soft, while others, such as diamond, are very hard and can easily scratch other substances. Appearances differ as well: most metals are shiny and silvery, but sulfur (a nonmetal) is yellow, and ionic compounds can take on a rainbow of colors. Solid metals conduct electricity and heat, while ionic solids do not. Many solids are opaque, but some are transparent. Some dissolve in water, but some do not. Figure 10.13 "Properties of Solids" shows two solids that exemplify the similar and dissimilar properties of solids. Figure 10.13 Properties of Solids. 
Osmosis is the diffusion of water molecules across a semipermeable membrane and down a concentration gradient. They can move into or out of a cell, depending on the concentration of the solute. 
Ground subsidence is a consequences of groundwater overuse. 
While many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties, some elements have similar properties. We can identify sets of elements that exhibit common behaviors. For example, many elements conduct heat and electricity well, whereas others are poor conductors. These properties can be used to sort the elements into three classes: metals (elements that conduct well), nonmetals (elements that conduct poorly), and metalloids (elements that have properties of both metals and nonmetals). The periodic table is a table of elements that places elements with similar properties close together (Figure 1.22). You will learn more about the periodic table as you continue your study of chemistry. 
Light is one type of electromagnetic radiation . Light is energy that travels in the form of an electromagnetic wave. Figure below shows a diagram of an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic (EM) wave has two parts: an electric field and a magnetic field. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate up and down, which makes the wave. 
Various studies were done on the effects of temperature changes on both pressure and volume by two prominent French scientists, Jacques Charles (1746-1823) and Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778-1850). In 1802, Charles and Gay-Lussac both proposed that for a fixed amount of gas at a constant pressure, the volume is directly proportional to its absolute temperature (V ∝ T). Figure below illustrates the volume-temperature relationship. 
Figure 2.43 Positions and velocities of a metal ball released from rest when air resistance is negligible. Velocity is seen to increase linearly with time while displacement increases with time squared. Acceleration is a constant and is equal to gravitational acceleration. 
The transfer of electrons from the van de Graaff generator to the man is an example of conduction. Conduction occurs when there is direct contact between materials that differ in their ability to give up or accept electrons. A van de Graff generator produces a negative charge on its dome, so it tends to give up electrons. Human hands are positively charged, so they tend to accept electrons. Therefore, electrons flow from the dome to the man’s hand when they are in contact. 
It could easily be said that a cell is the fundamental unit of life, the smallest unit capable of life or the structural and functional unit necessary for life. But whatever it is, a cell is necessary for life. And as shown above, a cell may be filled with all sorts of structures, each with its own specific function. This concept will discuss some of the fundamental properties of the cell, with lessons that include the cell structure, transport in and out of the cell, energy metabolism, and cell division and reproduction. 
Matter and energy are the most basic concepts in physical science. Watch this video about matter and energy, and then answer the questions below. 
Founder effect occurs when a few individuals start, or found, a new population. By chance, allele frequencies of the founders may be different from allele frequencies of the population they left. An example is described in Figure below . 
Introduction to Work, Energy, and Energy Resources Energy plays an essential role both in everyday events and in scientific phenomena. You can no doubt name many forms of energy, from that provided by our foods, to the energy we use to run our cars, to the sunlight that warms us on the beach. You can also cite examples of what people call energy that may not be scientific, such as someone having an energetic personality. Not only does energy have many interesting forms, it is involved in almost all phenomena, and is one of the most important concepts of physics. What makes it even more important is that the total amount of energy in the universe is constant. Energy can change forms, but it cannot appear from nothing or disappear without a trace. Energy is thus one of a handful of physical quantities that we say is conserved. Conservation of energy (as physicists like to call the principle that energy can neither be created nor destroyed) is based on experiment. Even as scientists discovered new forms of energy, conservation of energy has always been found to apply. Perhaps the most dramatic example of this was supplied by Einstein when he suggested that mass is equivalent to energy (his famous equation E = mc 2 ). From a societal viewpoint, energy is one of the major building blocks of modern civilization. Energy resources are key limiting factors to economic growth. The world use of energy resources, especially oil, continues to grow, with ominous consequences economically, socially, politically, and environmentally. We will briefly examine the world’s energy use patterns at the end of this chapter. There is no simple, yet accurate, scientific definition for energy. Energy is characterized by its many forms and the fact that it is conserved. We can loosely define energy as the ability to do work, admitting that in some circumstances not all energy is available to do work. Because of the association of energy with work, we begin the chapter with a discussion of work. Work is intimately related to energy and how energy moves from one system to another or changes form. 
Iron is oxidized to Fe2+(aq) at an anodic site on the surface of the iron, which is often an impurity or a lattice defect. Oxygen is reduced to water at a different site on the surface of the iron, which acts as the cathode. Electrons are transferred from the anode to the cathode through the electrically conductive metal. Water is a solvent for the Fe2+ that is produced initially and acts as a salt bridge. Rust (Fe2O3·xH2O) is formed by the subsequent oxidation of Fe2+ by atmospheric oxygen. In the corrosion process, iron metal acts as the anode in a galvanic cell and is oxidized to Fe2+; oxygen is reduced to water at the cathode. The relevant reactions are as follows:. 
Electrophiles have a strong tendency to react with nucleophiles. CONCEPTUAL PROBLEMS. 
The thermosphere is the layer above the mesosphere. It rises to 600 kilometers (372 miles) above the surface. The International Space Station and other space stations orbit Earth in this layer. 
When water moves into a cell by osmosis, osmotic pressure may build up inside the cell. If a cell has a cell wall, the wall helps maintain the cell’s water balance. Osmotic pressure is the main cause of support in many plants. When a plant cell is in a hypotonic environment, the osmotic entry of water raises the turgor pressure exerted against the cell wall until the pressure prevents more water from coming into the cell. At this point the plant cell is turgid ( Figure below ). The effects of osmotic pressures on plant cells are shown in Figure above . 
Seawater has lots of salts in it. This increases its density (mass per volume) over fresh water. Temperature and pressure also affect density. 
Characteristics of Amphibians As tetrapods, most amphibians are characterized by four well-developed limbs. Some species of salamanders and all caecilians are functionally limbless; their limbs are vestigial. An important characteristic of extant amphibians is a moist, permeable skin that is achieved via mucus glands that keep the skin moist; thus, exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide with the environment can take place through it ( cutaneous respiration). Additional characteristics of amphibians include pedicellate teeth—teeth in which the root and crown are calcified, separated by a zone of noncalcified tissue—and a papilla amphibiorum and papilla basilaris, structures of the inner ear that are sensitive to frequencies below and above 10,00 hertz, respectively. Amphibians also have an auricular operculum, which is an extra bone in the ear that transmits sounds to the inner ear. All extant adult amphibians are carnivorous, and some terrestrial amphibians have a sticky tongue that is used to capture prey. 
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are carbon compounds such as methane. VOCs are released in many human activities, such as raising livestock. Livestock wastes produce a lot of methane. 
Bacteria come in many different shapes. Some of the most common shapes are bacilli (rods), cocci (spheres), and spirilli (spirals). Bacteria can be identified and classified by their shape. 
Amphibians were the first animals to have true lungs and limbs for life on land. However, they still had to return to water to reproduce. That’s because their eggs lacked a waterproof covering and would dry out on land. The first fully terrestrial vertebrates were amniotes. Amniotes are animals that produce eggs with internal membranes. The membranes let gases but not water pass through. Therefore, in an amniotic egg, an embryo can breathe without drying out. Amniotic eggs were the first eggs that could be laid on land. 
Plant Parasites Protist parasites of terrestrial plants include agents that destroy food crops. The oomycete Plasmopara viticola parasitizes grape plants, causing a disease called downy mildew (Figure 13.18a). Grape plants infected with P. viticola appear stunted and have discolored withered leaves. The spread of downy mildew caused the near collapse of the French wine industry in the nineteenth century. 
12.4 The Action Potential The nervous system is characterized by electrical signals that are sent from one area to another. Whether those areas are close or very far apart, the signal must travel along an axon. The basis of the electrical signal is the controlled distribution of ions across the membrane. Transmembrane ion channels regulate when ions can move in or out of the cell, so that a precise signal is generated. This signal is the action potential which has a very characteristic shape based on voltage changes across the membrane in a given time period. The membrane is normally at rest with established Na+ and K+ concentrations on either side. A stimulus will start the depolarization of the membrane, and voltage-gated channels will result in further depolarization followed by repolarization of the membrane. A slight overshoot of hyperpolarization marks the end of the action potential. While an action potential is in progress, another cannot be generated under the same conditions. While the voltage-gated Na+ channel is inactivated, absolutely no action potentials can be generated. Once that channel has returned to its resting state, a new action potential is possible, but it must be started by a relatively stronger stimulus to overcome the K + leaving the cell. The action potential travels down the axon as voltage-gated ion channels are opened by the spreading depolarization. In unmyelinated axons, this happens in a continuous fashion because there are voltage-gated channels throughout the membrane. In myelinated axons, propagation is described as saltatory because voltage-gated channels are only found at the nodes of Ranvier and the electrical events seem to “jump” from one node to the next. Saltatory conduction is faster than continuous conduction, meaning that myelinated axons propagate their signals faster. The diameter of the axon also makes a difference as ions diffusing within the cell have less resistance in a wider space. 
The best-known method of radiometric dating is carbon-14 dating . A living thing takes in carbon-14 (along with stable carbon-12). As the carbon-14 decays, it is replaced with more carbon-14. After the organism dies, it stops taking in carbon. That includes carbon-14. The carbon-14 that is in its body continues to decay. So the organism contains less and less carbon-14 as time goes on. We can estimate the amount of carbon-14 that has decayed by measuring the amount of carbon-14 to carbon-12. We know how fast carbon-14 decays. With this information, we can tell how long ago the organism died. 
Humoral Stimuli The term “humoral” is derived from the term “humor,” which refers to bodily fluids such as blood. A humoral stimulus refers to the control of hormone release in response to changes in extracellular fluids such as blood or the ion concentration in the blood. For example, a rise in blood glucose levels triggers the pancreatic release of insulin. Insulin causes blood glucose levels to drop, which signals the pancreas to stop producing insulin in a negative feedback loop. 
What do these two photos have in common? They both represent electromagnetic waves. These are waves that consist of vibrating electric and magnetic fields. They transmit energy through matter or across space. Some electromagnetic waves are generally harmless. The light we use to see is a good example. Other electromagnetic waves can be very harmful and care must be taken to avoid too much exposure to them. X rays are a familiar example. Why do electromagnetic waves vary in these ways? It depends on their properties. Like other waves, electromagnetic waves have properties of speed, wavelength, and frequency. 
Birds may be specialists or generalists in terms of what they eat. Generalists are organisms that eat many different types of food. Birds that are generalists include the red-winged blackbird in Figure below . It has a basic beak that can eat many different foods. Red-winged blackbirds are omnivores. They may eat a wide variety of seeds as well as insects and other small animals such as snails and frogs. 
During asexual reproduction, fungi produce haploid spores by mitosis of a haploid parent cell. A haploid cell has just one of each pair of chromosomes. The haploid spores are genetically identical to the parent cell. Spores may be spread by moving water, wind, or other organisms. Wherever the spores land, they will develop into new hyphae only when conditions are suitable for growth. 
A storm is an episode of severe weather caused by a major disturbance in the atmosphere. Storms can vary a lot in the time they last and in how severe they are. A storm may last for less than an hour or for more than a week. It may affect just a few square kilometers or thousands. Some storms are harmless and some are disastrous. The size and strength of a storm depends on the amount of energy in the atmosphere. Greater differences in temperature and air pressure produce stronger storms. Types of storms include thunderstorms, tornadoes, hurricanes, and winter storms such as blizzards. 
If an atom gains electrons, it becomes an ion. Is the ion positively or negatively charged? Explain your answer. 
Late adulthood begins in the mid-60s and continues until death. This is the stage of life when most people retire from work. This frees up their time for hobbies, grandchildren, or other interests. For example, the man in Figure below enjoys creating music in old age. 
Amino acids join together to form a molecule called a dipeptide. The –OH from the carboxyl group of one amino acid combines with a hydrogen atom from the amino group of the other amino acid to produce water (blue). 
Lymphatic vessels make up a body-wide circulatory system. The fluid they circulate is lymph. Lymph is a fluid that leaks out of capillaries into spaces between cells. As the lymph accumulates between cells, it diffuses into tiny lymphatic vessels. The lymph then moves through the lymphatic system from smaller to larger vessels. It finally drains back into the bloodstream in the chest. As lymph passes through the lymphatic vessels, pathogens are filtered out at small structures called lymph nodes (see Figure above ). The filtered pathogens are destroyed by lymphocytes. 
Modern plants have three different types of tissues. They are called dermal, ground, and vascular tissues. Each type of tissue has a different function. 
Aquatic species generally have external fertilization, whereas terrestrial species usually have internal fertilization. 
The partial geologic time scale in Figure below shows when some of the major events in animal evolution took place. The oldest animal fossils are about 630 million years old, so presumably animals evolved around that time or somewhat earlier. The earliest animals were aquatic invertebrates. The first vertebrates evolved around 550 million years ago. By 500 million years ago, most modern phyla of animals had evolved. The first terrestrial animals evolved about 50 million years after that. 
26.3 Color and Color Vision • The eye has four types of light receptors—rods and three types of color-sensitive cones. • The rods are good for night vision, peripheral vision, and motion changes, while the cones are responsible for central vision and color. • We perceive many hues, from light having mixtures of wavelengths. • A simplified theory of color vision states that there are three primary colors, which correspond to the three types of cones, and that various combinations of the primary colors produce all the hues. • The true color of an object is related to its relative absorption of various wavelengths of light. The color of a light source is related to the wavelengths it produces. • Color constancy is the ability of the eye-brain system to discern the true color of an object illuminated by various light sources. • The retinex theory of color vision explains color constancy by postulating the existence of three retinexes or image systems, associated with the three types of cones that are compared to obtain sophisticated information. 
Modern plants that live in water are called aquatic plants . Living in water has certain advantages for plants. One advantage is, well, the water. There's plenty of it and it's all around. Therefore, most aquatic plants do not need adaptations for absorbing, transporting, and conserving water. They can save energy and matter by not growing extensive root systems, vascular tissues, or thick cuticle on leaves. Support is also less of a problem because of the buoyancy of water. As a result, adaptations such as strong woody stems and deep anchoring roots are not necessary for most aquatic plants. 
Carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids provide energy and have other important roles in the body. 
Fungus-like protists share many features with fungi. Like fungi, they are heterotrophs, meaning they must obtain food outside themselves. They also have cell walls and reproduce by forming spores, just like fungi. Fungus-like protists usually do not move, but a few develop movement at some point in their lives. Two major types of fungus-like protists are slime molds and water molds . 
Wavelengths are described by a unit of distance, typically meters. 
Contact metamorphism occurs when a rock is altered by heat from a nearby magma. 
Some resources can’t be renewed. At least, they can’t be renewed fast enough to keep up with use. Fossil fuels are an example. It takes millions of years for them to form. We are using them up much more quickly. Elements that are used to produce nuclear power are also non-renewable resources. Uranium, for example, which is rare. Sooner or later, it will run out. 
Asexual reproduction can be very rapid. This is an advantage for many organisms. It allows these organisms to crowd out other organisms that reproduce more slowly. Bacteria, for example, may divide several times per hour. Under ideal conditions, 100 bacteria can divide to produce millions of bacterial cells in just a few hours. However, most bacteria do not live under ideal conditions. If they did, the entire surface of the planet would soon be covered with them. Instead, their reproduction is kept in check by limited resources, predators, and their own wastes. This is true of most other organisms as well. 
The immune system usually protects you from pathogens and other causes of disease. When the immune system is working properly, it keeps you from getting sick. But the immune system is like any other system of the body. It can break down or develop diseases. 
Larynx The larynx is a cartilaginous structure inferior to the laryngopharynx that connects the pharynx to the trachea and helps regulate the volume of air that enters and leaves the lungs (Figure 22.7). The structure of the larynx is formed by several pieces of cartilage. Three large cartilage pieces—the thyroid cartilage (anterior), epiglottis (superior), and cricoid cartilage (inferior)—form the major structure of the larynx. The thyroid cartilage is the largest piece of cartilage that makes up the larynx. The thyroid cartilage consists of the laryngeal prominence, or “Adam’s apple,” which tends to be more prominent in males. The thick cricoid cartilage forms a ring, with a wide posterior region and a thinner anterior region. Three smaller,. 
Cells in our bodies have an intricate mechanism for the manufacture of proteins. Humans have to use other techniques in order to synthesize the same proteins in a lab. The chemistry of peptide synthesis is complicated. Both active groups on an amino acid can react and the amino acid sequence must be a specific one in order for the protein to function. Robert Merrifield developed the first synthetic approach for making proteins in the lab, a manual approach which was lengthy and tedious (and, he won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1984 for his work). Today however, automated systems can crank out a peptide in a very short period of time. 
Next, air passes through the pharynx, a passageway that is shared with the digestive system. From the pharynx, the air passes next through the larynx, or voice box. 
Ohm’s law may be easier to understand with an analogy. Current flowing through a wire is like water flowing through a hose. Increasing voltage with a higher-volt battery increases the current. This is like opening the tap wider so more water flows through the hose. Increasing resistance reduces the current. This is like stepping on the hose so less water can flow through it. If you still aren’t sure about the relationships among current, voltage, and resistance, watch the video at this URL: http://www. youtube. com/watch?v=KvVTh3ak5dQ. 
Reflecting surfaces do not have to be flat. The most common curved mirrors are spherical. A spherical mirror is called a concave mirror if the center of the mirror is further from the viewer than the edges are. A spherical mirror is called a convex mirror if the center of the mirror is closer to the viewer than the edges are. 
Neurons that innervate the muscles of the respiratory system are responsible for controlling and regulating pulmonary ventilation. The major brain centers involved in pulmonary ventilation are the medulla oblongata and the pontine respiratory group (Figure 22.20). 
Several lethal viruses that cause viral hemorrhagic fever have been discovered, two of which are shown in the Figure below . Ebola outbreaks have been limited mainly to remote areas of the world. However, they have gained extensive media attention because of the high mortality rate—23 percent to 90 percent—depending on the strain. The primary hosts of the viruses are thought to be apes in west central Africa, but the virus has also been isolated from bats in the same region. 
Did you notice that none of these statements relates to the identity of the gas? This means that all gases should behave similarly. A gas that follows these statements perfectly is called an ideal gas. Most gases show slight deviations from these statements and are called real gases. However, the existence of real gases does not diminish the importance of the kinetic theory of gases. One of the statements of the kinetic theory mentions collisions. As gas particles are constantly moving, they are also constantly colliding with each other and with the walls of their container. There are forces involved as gas particles bounce off the container walls (Figure 8.9 "Gas Pressure"). The force generated by gas particles divided by the. 
Photosynthesis provides over 99 percent of the energy for life on earth. A much smaller group of autotrophs - mostly bacteria in dark or low-oxygen environments - produce food using the chemical energy stored in inorganic molecules such as hydrogen sulfide, ammonia, or methane. While photosynthesis transforms light energy to chemical energy, this alternate method of making food transfers chemical energy from inorganic to organic molecules. It is therefore called chemosynthesis , and is characteristic of the tubeworms shown in Figure below . Some of the most recently discovered chemosynthetic bacteria inhabit deep ocean hot water vents or “black smokers. ” There, they use the energy in gases from the Earth’s interior to produce food for a variety of unique heterotrophs: giant tube worms, blind shrimp, giant white crabs, and armored snails. Some scientists think that chemosynthesis may support life below the surface of Mars, Jupiter's moon, Europa, and other planets as well. Ecosystems based on chemosynthesis may seem rare and exotic, but they too illustrate the absolute dependence of heterotrophs on autotrophs for food. 
Another measure of the effectiveness of a machine is its mechanical advantage. Mechanical advantage is the number of times a machine multiplies the input force. It can be calculated with the equation:. 
Scientists also collect rock and sediment samples from the seafloor. A dredge is a giant rectangular bucket that is dragged along behind a ship. The dredge picks up loose rocks lying on the seafloor. Gravity corers are metal tubes that fall to the seafloor. They slice into the sediments to collect a sample. The research vessel, the Joides Resolution , drills deep into the seafloor to collect samples of the sediment and ocean crust. Scientists analyze the samples for chemistry and their magnetic properties. 
Binary Fission Due to the relative simplicity of the prokaryotes, the cell division process, called binary fission, is a less complicated and much more rapid process than cell division in eukaryotes. The single, circular DNA chromosome of bacteria is not enclosed in a nucleus, but instead occupies a specific location, the nucleoid, within the cell (Figure 10.2). Although the DNA of the nucleoid is associated with proteins that aid in packaging the molecule into a compact size, there are no histone proteins and thus no nucleosomes in prokaryotes. The packing proteins of bacteria are, however, related to the cohesin and condensin proteins involved in the chromosome compaction of eukaryotes. The bacterial chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell. The starting point of replication, the origin, is close to the binding site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane (Figure 10.15). Replication of the DNA is bidirectional, moving away from the origin on both strands of the loop simultaneously. As the new double strands are formed, each origin point moves away from the cell wall attachment toward the opposite ends of the cell. As the cell elongates, the growing membrane aids in the transport of the chromosomes. After the chromosomes have cleared the midpoint of the elongated cell, cytoplasmic separation begins. The formation of a ring composed of repeating units of a protein called FtsZ directs the partition between the nucleoids. Formation of the FtsZ ring triggers the accumulation of other proteins that work together to recruit new membrane and cell wall materials to the site. A septum is formed between the nucleoids, extending gradually from the periphery toward the center of the cell. When the new cell walls are in place, the daughter cells separate. 
Cellulose is a compound found in plants. The chief component of cellulose is carbon. Cellulose is one of many carbon-based compounds that make up living things. In fact, carbon-based compounds are the most common type of compound on Earth. More than 90 percent of all known compounds contain carbon. Do you know why carbon is found in so many compounds? Read on to find out. 
Photosynthesis and cellular respiration are connected through an important relationship. This relationship enables life to survive as we know it. The products of one process are the reactants of the other. Notice that the equation for cellular respiration is the direct opposite of photosynthesis :. 
A unit cell is the smallest portion of a crystal lattice that shows the three-dimensional pattern of the entire crystal. A crystal can be thought of as the same unit cell repeated over and over in three dimensions. The Figure below illustrates the relationship of a unit cell to the entire crystal lattice. 
The concentration of hydronium ions in a solution is known as acidity. In pure water, the concentration of hydronium ions is very low; only about 1 in 10 million water molecules naturally breaks down to form a hydronium ion. As a result, pure water is essentially neutral. Acidity is measured on a scale called pH , as shown in Figure below . Pure water has a pH of 7, so the point of neutrality on the pH scale is 7. 
Water is heated in a boiler that burns a fuel such as natural gas or heating oil. The boiler converts the chemical energy stored in the fuel to thermal energy. 
Humans could not live on Earth if it were not for protists. Why? Plant-like protists produce almost one-half of the oxygen on the planet through photosynthesis. Other protists decompose and recycle nutrients that humans need to live. All protists make up a huge part of the food chain. 
The Cytoplasm The cytoplasm comprises the contents of a cell between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope (a structure to be discussed shortly). It is made up of organelles suspended in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and various chemicals (Figure 3.7). Even though the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80 percent water, it has a semi-solid consistency, which comes from the proteins within it. However, proteins are not the only organic molecules found in the cytoplasm. Glucose and other simple sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, fatty acids, and derivatives of glycerol are found there too. Ions of sodium, potassium, calcium, and many other elements are also dissolved in the cytoplasm. Many metabolic reactions, including protein synthesis, take place in the cytoplasm. 
A great many experiments have been performed to test the predictions of special relativity. No contradictions have been found. Scientists have therefore accepted special relativity as an accurate description of nature. When the relative velocities of objects are considerably less than the speed of light, the formulas for relativistic time, length, and mass all reduce to the classical formulas. It is required that the two theories correspond where they overlap at speeds much less than . Special relativity does not contradict classical mechanics. Rather, it is a more general theory needed for object speeds approaching the speed of light. 
When lactose is absent, a repressor protein binds to the operator. The operator is located between the promoter and the three lac operon genes. The protein blocks the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter. As a result, the lac genes are not expressed. 
When chemists synthesize a new compound, they may not yet know its molecular or structural formula. In such cases, they usually begin by determining itsempirical formula, the relative numbers of atoms of the elements in a compound, reduced to the smallest whole numbers. Because the empirical formula is based on experimental measurements of the numbers of atoms in a sample of the compound, it shows only the ratios of the numbers of the elements present. The difference betweenempirical and molecular formulas can be illustrated with butane, a covalent compound used as the fuel in disposable lighters. The molecular formula for butane is C4H10. The ratio of carbon atoms to hydrogen atoms in butane is 4:10, which can be reduced to 2:5. The empirical formula for butane is therefore C2H5. The formula unit is the absolutegrouping of atoms or ions represented by the empirical formula of a compound, either ionic or covalent. Butane, for example, has the empirical formula C2H5, but it contains two C2H5 formula units, giving a molecular formula of C4H10. Because ionic compounds do not contain discrete molecules, empirical formulas are used to indicate their compositions. All compounds, whether ionic or covalent, must be electrically neutral. Consequently, the positive and negative charges in a formula unit must exactly cancel each other. If the cation and the anion have charges of equal. 
Specialization in Anole Lizards. Specialization lets different species of anole lizards live in the same area without competing. 
This chart shows the genetic code used by all organisms. For example, an RNA codon reading GUU would encode for a valine (Val) according to this chart. Start at the center for the first base of the three base codon, and work your way out. Notice that more than one codon may encode for a single amino acid. For example, glycine (Gly) is encoded by a GGG, GGA, GGC, and GGU. Notice there are 64 codons. Of the 64 codons, three are stop codons. 
Absorptive protists absorb food molecules across their cell membranes. This occurs by diffusion . These protists are important decomposers. 
Male Reproductive System Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a condition in which a man has difficulty either initiating or maintaining an erection. The combined prevalence of minimal, moderate, and complete ED is approximately 40 percent in men at age 40, and reaches nearly 70 percent by 70 years of age. In addition to aging, ED is associated with diabetes, vascular disease, psychiatric disorders, prostate disorders, the use of some drugs such as certain antidepressants, and problems with the testes resulting in low testosterone concentrations. These physical and emotional conditions can lead to interruptions in the vasodilation pathway and result in an inability to achieve an erection. Recall that the release of NO induces relaxation of the smooth muscles that surround the penile arteries, leading to the vasodilation necessary to achieve an erection. To reverse the process of vasodilation, an enzyme called phosphodiesterase (PDE) degrades a key component of the NO signaling pathway called cGMP. There are several different forms of this enzyme, and PDE type 5 is the type of PDE found in the tissues of the penis. Scientists discovered that inhibiting PDE5 increases blood flow, and allows vasodilation of the penis to occur. PDEs and the vasodilation signaling pathway are found in the vasculature in other parts of the body. In the 1990s, clinical trials of a PDE5 inhibitor called sildenafil were initiated to treat hypertension and angina pectoris (chest pain caused by poor blood flow through the heart). The trial showed that the drug was not effective at treating heart conditions, but many men experienced erection and priapism (erection lasting longer than 4 hours). Because of this, a clinical trial was started to investigate the ability of sildenafil to promote erections in men suffering from ED. In 1998, the FDA approved the drug, marketed as Viagra®. Since approval of the drug, sildenafil and similar PDE inhibitors now generate over a billion dollars a year in sales, and are reported to be effective in treating approximately 70 to 85 percent of cases of ED. Importantly, men with health problems—especially those with cardiac disease taking nitrates—should avoid Viagra or talk to their physician to find out if they are a candidate for the use of this drug, as deaths have been reported for at-risk users. 
Earthquakes are primarily the result of plate tectonic motions. What type of stress would cause earthquakes at each of the three types of plate boundaries?. 
In summary, society is facing an antibiotic crisis. Some scientists believe that after years of being protected from bacterial infections by antibiotics, we may be returning to a time in which a simple bacterial infection could again devastate the human population. Researchers are working on developing new antibiotics, but few are in the drug development pipeline, and it takes many years to generate an effective and approved drug. Naimi, T. , LeDell, K. , Como-Sabetti, K. , et al. , “Comparison of community- and health care-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection,” JAMA 290 (2003): 2976-2984, doi: 10.1001/jama.290.22.2976. 
Potassium Potassium is the major intracellular cation. It helps establish the resting membrane potential in neurons and muscle fibers after membrane depolarization and action potentials. In contrast to sodium, potassium has very little effect on osmotic. 
The two tonsils are located on either side of the throat. They trap pathogens that enter the body through the mouth or nose. 
Even compounds with the same number of carbon and hydrogen atoms can have different shapes. These compounds are called isomers . Look at the examples in Figure below . The figure shows the structural formulas of butane and its isomer iso -butane. Both molecules have four carbon atoms and ten hydrogen atoms (C 4 H 10 ), but the atoms are arranged differently. Butane is a straight-chain molecule. Iso -butane is branched. You can see three-dimensional models of these two isomers at the URLs below. You can rotate the molecule models to get a better idea of their shapes. 
The Epidermis The epidermis is composed of keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. It is made of four or five layers of epithelial cells, depending on its location in the body. It does not have any blood vessels within it (i. , it is avascular). Skin that has four layers of cells is referred to as “thin skin. ” From deep to superficial, these layers are the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, stratum granulosum, and stratum corneum. Most of the skin can be classified as thin skin. “Thick skin” is found only on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet. It has a fifth layer, called the stratum lucidum, located between the stratum corneum and the stratum granulosum (Figure 5.3). 
Roots: Support for the Plant Roots are not well preserved in the fossil record; nevertheless, it seems that they did appear later in evolution than vascular tissue. The development of an extensive network of roots represented a significant new feature of vascular plants. Thin rhizoids attached the bryophytes to the substrate. Their rather flimsy filaments did not provide a strong anchor for the plant; neither did they absorb water and nutrients. In contrast, roots, with their prominent vascular tissue system, transfer water and minerals from the soil to the rest of the plant. The extensive network of roots that penetrates deep in the ground to reach sources of water also stabilizes trees by acting as ballast and an anchor. The majority of roots establish a symbiotic relationship with fungi, forming mycorrhizae. In the mycorrhizae, fungal hyphae grow around the root and within the root around the cells, and in some instances within the cells. This benefits the plant by greatly increasing the surface area for absorption. Leaves, Sporophylls, and Strobili A third adaptation marks seedless vascular plants. Accompanying the prominence of the sporophyte and the development of vascular tissue, the appearance of true leaves improved photosynthetic efficiency. Leaves capture more sunlight with their increased surface area. In addition to photosynthesis, leaves play another role in the life of the plants. Pinecones, mature fronds of ferns, and flowers are all sporophylls—leaves that were modified structurally to bear sporangia. Strobili are structures that contain the sporangia. They are prominent in conifers and are known commonly as cones: for example, the pine cones of pine trees. 
Modern Amphibians Amphibia comprises an estimated 6,770 extant species that inhabit tropical and temperate regions around the world. Amphibians can be divided into three clades: Urodela (“tailed-ones”), the salamanders; Anura (“tail-less ones”), the frogs; and Apoda (“legless ones”), the caecilians. Urodela: Salamanders Salamanders are amphibians that belong to the order Urodela. Living salamanders (Figure 29.16) include approximately 620 species, some of which are aquatic, other terrestrial, and some that live on land only as adults. Adult salamanders usually have a generalized tetrapod body plan with four limbs and a tail. They move by bending their bodies from side to side, called lateral undulation, in a fish-like manner while “walking” their arms and legs fore and aft. It is thought that their gait is similar to that used by early tetrapods. Respiration differs among different species. The majority of salamanders are lungless, and respiration occurs through the skin or through external gills. Some terrestrial salamanders have primitive lungs; a few species have both gills and lungs. Unlike frogs, virtually all salamanders rely on internal fertilization of the eggs. The only male amphibians that possess copulatory structures are the caecilians, so fertilization among salamanders typically involves an elaborate and often prolonged courtship. Such a courtship allows the successful transfer of sperm from male to female via a spermatophore. Development in many of the most highly evolved salamanders, which are fully terrestrial, occurs during a prolonged egg stage, with the eggs guarded by the mother. During this time, the gilled larval stage is found only within the egg capsule, with the gills being resorbed, and metamorphosis being completed, before hatching. Hatchlings thus resemble tiny adults. 
The three general transfers are believed to occur normally in most cells. These describe the normal flow of biological information. DNA is replicated, DNA is transcribed into RNA, and RNA is translated into protein. The three special transfers are known to occur under special conditions, such as with some viruses. The three unknown transfers are not believed to occur. 
called the relative osmotic pressure if neither solution is pure water, and it is called the osmotic pressure if one solution is pure water. Osmotic pressure can be large, depending on the size of the concentration difference. For example, if pure water and sea water are separated by a semipermeable membrane that passes no salt, osmotic pressure will be 25.9 atm. This value means that water will diffuse through the membrane until the salt water surface rises 268 m above the pure-water surface! One example of pressure created by osmosis is turgor in plants (many wilt when too dry). Turgor describes the condition of a plant in which the fluid in a cell exerts a pressure against the cell wall. This pressure gives the plant support. Dialysis can similarly cause substantial pressures. 
Atomic emission spectra are produced when excited electrons return to ground state. 
The space shuttle—and any other rocket-based system—uses chemical reactions to propel itself into space and maneuver itself when it gets into orbit. The rockets that lift the orbiter are of two different types. The three main engines are powered by reacting liquid hydrogen with liquid oxygen to generate water. Then there are the two solid rocket boosters, which use a solid fuel mixture that contains mainly ammonium perchlorate and powdered aluminum. The chemical reaction between these substances produces aluminum oxide, water, nitrogen gas, and hydrogen chloride. Although the solid rocket boosters each have a significantly lower mass than the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen tanks, they provide over 80% of the lift needed to put the shuttle into orbit—all because of chemical reactions. 
A population is a group of organisms of the same species that live in the same area. All the genes in all the members of a population make up the population’s gene pool . For each gene, the gene pool includes all the different alleles in the population. The gene pool can be described by its allele frequencies for specific genes. The frequency of an allele is the number of copies of that allele divided by the total number of alleles for the gene in the gene pool. 
Diagram of a Cytomegalovirus. The capsid encloses the genetic material of the virus. The envelope which surrounds the capsid is typically made from portions of the host cell membranes (phospholipids and proteins). Not all viruses have a viral envelope. 
Echinoderms have a unique water vascular system with tube feet. This allows slow but powerful movement. 
Oil (red) is found in the porous rock layer (yellow) and trapped by the impermeable layer (brown). The folded structure has allowed the oil to pool so a well can be drilled into the reservoir. 
The force of gravity is called weight. Near the surface of a planet, it has magnitude and is directed perpendicular to its surface. This is different from the Gravitational Constant, and differs from planet to planet. 
Frogs develop from tadpoles, which develop from eggs. Notice the formation of the two powerful back legs used for jumping. 
Blood pressure is read as two numbers. The first number is the systolic pressure. The systolic pressure is the pressure on the blood vessels when the heart beats. This is the time when there is the highest pressure in the arteries. The diastolic pressure, which is the second number, is when your blood pressure is lowest, when the heart is resting between beats. 
One way early land invertebrates solved these problems was with an exoskeleton. This is a non-bony skeleton that forms on the outside of the body. It supports the body and helps it retain water. As the organism grows, it sheds its old exoskeleton and grows a new one. Figure below shows the discarded exoskeleton of a dragonfly. 
Bacterial contamination of foods can lead to digestive problems, an illness known as food poisoning . Raw eggs and undercooked meats commonly carry the bacteria that can cause food poisoning. Food poisoning can be prevented by cooking meat thoroughly and washing surfaces that have been in contact with raw meat. Washing your hands before and after handling food also helps prevent contamination. 
Hydrocarbons may form straight chains, branched chains, or rings. Ring-shaped hydrocarbons are called cyclic hydrocarbons. 
Electric charge is found only in a conductor. 
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons with at least one double bond between carbon atoms. 
Carnivores feed on animals, either herbivores or other carnivores. Snakes that eat mice are carnivores. Hawks that eat snakes are also carnivores ( Figure below ). 
27.2 Features Used to Classify Animals Organisms in the animal kingdom are classified based on their body morphology and development. True animals are divided into those with radial versus bilateral symmetry. Generally, the simpler and often non-motile animals display radial symmetry. Animals with radial symmetry are also generally characterized by the development of two embryological germ layers, the endoderm and ectoderm, whereas animals with bilateral symmetry are generally characterized by the development of a third embryological germ layer, the mesoderm. Animals with three germ layers, called triploblasts, are further characterized by the presence or absence of an internal body cavity called a coelom. The presence of a coelom affords many advantages, and animals with a coelom may be termed true coelomates or pseudocoelomates, depending on which tissue gives rise to the coelom. Coelomates are further divided into one of two groups called protostomes and deuterostomes, based on a number of developmental characteristics, including differences in zygote cleavage and method of coelom formation. 
Pneumonia is a disease in which some of the alveoli of the lungs fill with fluid so they can no longer exchange gas. Symptoms of pneumonia typically include coughing, chest pain, difficulty breathing, and fatigue. Pneumonia may be caused by an infection or an injury to the lungs. 
A mutation may have no effect. However, sometimes a mutation can cause a protein to be made incorrectly. A defect in the protein can affect how well the protein works, or whether it works at all. Usually the loss of a protein function is detrimental to the organism. 
Surface mining exposes minerals that were underground to air and water at the surface. These minerals contain the chemical element sulfur. Sulfur mixes with air and water to make sulfuric acid. This acid is a highly corrosive chemical. Sulfuric acid gets into nearby streams and can kill fish, plants, and animals. Surface mining is safer for the miners. 
A transverse wave is a wave in which particles of the medium vibrate at right angles, or perpendicular, to the direction that the wave travels. Another example of a transverse wave is the wave that passes through a rope with you shake one end of the rope up and down, as in the Figure below . The direction of the wave is down the length of the rope away from the hand. The rope itself moves up and down as the wave passes through it. You can watch a video of a transverse wave in a rope at this URL: http://www. youtube. com/watch?v=TZIr9mpERbU . 
Getting the same result when an experiment is repeated is called replication. If research results can be replicated, it means they are more likely to be correct. 
Vascular seedless plants have vascular tissue, a specialized tissue that transports water and nutrients throughout the plant. 
To obtain the tabulated results for this decomposition, the concentration of hydrogen peroxide was measured every 6 hours over the course of a day at a constant temperature of 40 °C. Reaction rates were computed for each time interval by dividing the change in concentration by the corresponding time increment, as shown here for the first 6-hour period: −Δ[H 2 O 2] −(0.500 mol/L − 1.000 mol/L) = = 0.0833 mol L −1 h −1 Δt (6.00 h − 0.00 h) Notice that the reaction rates vary with time, decreasing as the reaction proceeds. Results for the last 6-hour period yield a reaction rate of: −Δ[H 2 O 2] −(0.0625 mol/L − 0.125 mol/L) = = 0.0104 mol L −1 h −1 Δt (24.00 h − 18.00 h) This behavior indicates the reaction continually slows with time. Using the concentrations at the beginning and end of a time period over which the reaction rate is changing results in the calculation of an average rate for the reaction over this time interval. At any specific time, the rate at which a reaction is proceeding is known as its instantaneous rate. The instantaneous rate of a reaction at “time zero,” when the reaction commences, is its initial rate. Consider the analogy of a car slowing down as it approaches a stop sign. The vehicle’s initial rate—analogous to the beginning of a chemical reaction—would be the speedometer reading at the moment the driver begins pressing the brakes (t0). A few moments later, the instantaneous rate at a specific moment—call it t1—would be somewhat slower, as indicated by the speedometer reading at that point in time. As time passes, the instantaneous rate will continue to fall until it reaches zero, when the car (or reaction) stops. Unlike instantaneous speed, the car’s average speed is not indicated by the speedometer; but it can be calculated as the ratio of the distance traveled to the time required to bring the vehicle to a complete stop (Δt). Like the decelerating car, the average rate of a chemical reaction will fall somewhere between its initial and final rates. The instantaneous rate of a reaction may be determined one of two ways. If experimental conditions permit the measurement of concentration changes over very short time intervals, then average rates computed as described earlier provide reasonably good approximations of instantaneous rates. Alternatively, a graphical procedure may be used that, in effect, yields the results that would be obtained if short time interval measurements were possible. If we plot the concentration of hydrogen peroxide against time, the instantaneous rate of decomposition of H2O2 at any time t is given by the slope of a straight line that is tangent to the curve at that time (Figure 12.3). We can use calculus to evaluating the slopes of such tangent lines, but the procedure for doing so is beyond the scope of this chapter. 
21.2 | Threats to Biodiversity By the end of this section, you will be able to: • Identify significant threats to biodiversity • Explain the effects of habitat loss, exotic species, and hunting on biodiversity • Identify the early and predicted effects of climate change on biodiversity The core threat to biodiversity on the planet, and therefore a threat to human welfare, is the combination of human population growth and the resources used by that population. The human population requires resources to survive and grow, and those resources are being removed unsustainably from the environment. The three greatest proximate threats to biodiversity are habitat loss, overharvesting, and introduction of exotic species. The first two of these are a direct result of human population growth and resource use. The third results from increased mobility and trade. A fourth major cause of extinction, anthropogenic (human-caused) climate change, has not yet had a large impact, but it is predicted to become significant during this century. Global climate change is also a consequence of human population needs for energy and the use of fossil fuels to meet those needs (Figure 21.7). Environmental issues, such as toxic pollution, have specific targeted effects on species, but are not generally seen as threats at the magnitude of the others. 
31.2 Central nervous system Central nervous system includes the brain and the spinal cord. Brain There are four lobes of the brain. • • • •. 
The asthenosphere is below the lithosphere. The asthenosphere is also in the upper mantle. This layer is solid, but it can flow and bend. A solid that can flow is like silly putty. 
Digestion consists of mechanical and chemical digestion. 
membrane is a positive 15 mV, meaning that the membrane depolarizes from -70 mV to -55 mV, then the graded potentials will result in the membrane reaching threshold. For receptor potentials, threshold is not a factor because the change in membrane potential for receptor cells directly causes neurotransmitter release. However, generator potentials can initiate action potentials in the sensory neuron axon, and postsynaptic potentials can initiate an action potential in the axon of other neurons. Graded potentials summate at a specific location at the beginning of the axon to initiate the action potential, namely the initial segment. For sensory neurons, which do not have a cell body between the dendrites and the axon, the initial segment is directly adjacent to the dendritic endings. For all other neurons, the axon hillock is essentially the initial segment of the axon, and it is where summation takes place. These locations have a high density of voltage-gated Na+ channels that initiate the depolarizing phase of the action potential. Summation can be spatial or temporal, meaning it can be the result of multiple graded potentials at different locations on the neuron, or all at the same place but separated in time. Spatial summation is related to associating the activity of multiple inputs to a neuron with each other. Temporal summation is the relationship of multiple action potentials from a single cell resulting in a significant change in the membrane potential. Spatial and temporal summation can act together, as well. 
Evolution means change over time. Darwin’s theory of evolution says that organisms change over time ( Figure below ). Evolution is seen in the fossil record. It is seen in the way organisms develop. Evolution is evident in the geographic locations where organism are found. It is evident in the genes of living organisms. Evolution has a mechanism called natural selection . The organism that is best suited to its environment is most likely to survive. Evolution is described in the chapter Life on Earth . 
Oxygen has increased in the atmosphere throughout the history of the earth. Note the logarithmic scale, which indicates great increases after first photosynthesis (in bacteria) and then land plants evolved. Related geological events: A = no oxidized iron; B = oxidized iron bands in seabed rock - evidence for O 2 in the oceans; C = oxidized iron bands on land and ozone layer formation- evidence for O 2 in the atmosphere. 
When plants and other organisms die, decomposers break down their remains. In the process, they release nitrogen in the form of ammonium ions. This process is called ammonification. Nitrifying bacteria change the ammonium ions into nitrites and nitrates. Some of the nitrates are used by plants. The process of converting ammonium ions to nitrites or nitrates is called nitrification. Still other bacteria, called denitrifying bacteria, convert some of the nitrates in soil back into nitrogen gas in a process called denitrification. The process is the opposite of nitrogen fixation. Denitrification returns nitrogen gas back to the atmosphere, where it can continue the nitrogen cycle. 
All solutions contain at least two substances. 
Leaf Arrangement The arrangement of leaves on a stem is known as phyllotaxy. The number and placement of a plant’s leaves will vary depending on the species, with each species exhibiting a characteristic leaf arrangement. Leaves are classified as either alternate, spiral, or opposite. Plants that have only one leaf per node have leaves that are said to be either alternate—meaning the leaves alternate on each side of the stem in a flat plane—or spiral, meaning the leaves are arrayed in a spiral along the stem. In an opposite leaf arrangement, two leaves arise at the same point, with the leaves connecting opposite each other along the branch. If there are three or more leaves connected at a node, the leaf arrangement is classified as whorled. 
Clouds form when water vapor condenses in the air around specs of matter. Clouds are classified on the basis of where and how they form. Types of clouds include cirrus, stratus, and cumulus clouds. 
Knowledge gained by this basic research on yeast cells has been applied to practical problems. Scientists have developed drugs to treat cancer based on knowledge of the cell cycle. Cancer is a disease in which cells divide out of control. The new drugs interfere with the cell cycle of cancer cells, so the cells stop dividing. This is an example of applied science. The aim of applied science is to find solutions to practical problems. Applied science generally rests on knowledge gained by basic science. 
On the far right are X rays and gamma rays. The have the shortest wavelengths and highest frequencies of all electromagnetic waves. They also have the greatest amount of energy. 
Root Growth and Anatomy Root growth begins with seed germination. When the plant embryo emerges from the seed, the radicle of the embryo forms the root system. The tip of the root is protected by the root cap, a structure exclusive to roots and unlike any other plant structure. The root cap is continuously replaced because it gets damaged easily as the root pushes through soil. The root tip can be divided into three zones: a zone of cell division, a zone of elongation, and a zone of maturation and differentiation (Figure 30.16). The zone of cell division is closest to the root tip; it is made up of the actively dividing cells of the root meristem. The zone of elongation is where the newly formed cells increase in length, thereby lengthening the root. Beginning at the first root hair is the zone of cell maturation where the root cells begin to differentiate into special cell types. All three zones are in the first centimeter or so of the root tip. 
As the name suggests, open-pit mining creates a big pit from which the ore is mined. Figure below shows an open-pit diamond mine in Russia. The size of the pit grows as long as the miners can make a profit. Strip mines are similar to open-pit mines, but the ore is removed in large strips. A quarry is a type of open-pit mine that produces rocks and minerals that are used to make buildings and roads. 
Mutations in regulatory genes that normally control the cell cycle cause cancer. 
Sensory Nerves The olfactory, optic, and vestibulocochlear nerves (cranial nerves I, II, and VIII) are dedicated to four of the special senses: smell, vision, equilibrium, and hearing, respectively. Taste sensation is relayed to the brain stem through fibers of the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves. The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve that carries the general somatic senses from the head, similar to those coming through spinal nerves from the rest of the body. Testing smell is straightforward, as common smells are presented to one nostril at a time. The patient should be able to recognize the smell of coffee or mint, indicating the proper functioning of the olfactory system. Loss of the sense of smell is called anosmia and can be lost following blunt trauma to the head or through aging. The short axons of the first cranial nerve regenerate on a regular basis. The neurons in the olfactory epithelium have a limited life span, and new cells grow to replace the ones that die off. The axons from these neurons grow back into the CNS by following the existing axons—representing one of the few examples of such growth in the mature nervous system. If all of the fibers are sheared when the brain moves within the cranium, such as in a motor vehicle accident, then no axons can find their way back to the olfactory bulb to reestablish connections. If the nerve is not completely severed, the anosmia may be temporary as new neurons can eventually reconnect. 
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. A living thing, like you, is called an organism. Thus, cells are the basic building blocks of all organisms. In multicellular organisms, several cells of one particular kind interconnect with each other and perform shared functions to form tissues (for example, muscle tissue, connective tissue, and nervous tissue), several tissues combine to form an organ (for example, stomach, heart, or brain), and several organs make up an organ system (such as the digestive system, circulatory system, or nervous system). Several systems functioning together form an organism (such as an elephant, for example). There are many types of cells, and all are grouped into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Animal cells, plant cells, fungal cells, and protist cells are classified as eukaryotic, whereas bacteria and archaea cells are classified as prokaryotic. Before discussing the criteria for determining whether a cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic, let us first examine how biologists study cells. 
chlorine is added to an aqueous solution of bromide. iodine crystals are added to a solution of potassium bromide. Bromide is present in naturally occurring salt solutions called brines. Based on your answers, propose an effective method to remove bromide from brine. 
When a blood vessel gets clogged, there is no medical equivalent of "Drano" that will clear it out. There is, however, a procedure known as angioplasty. A thin tube with a balloon is threaded through the blood vessels. Once in place, the balloon is inflated to compress the clog against the artery wall. 
Figure below shows the main gases in air. Nitrogen and oxygen make up 99 percent of air. Argon and carbon dioxide make up much of the rest. These percentages are the same just about everywhere in the atmosphere. 
The mechanical advantage of a machine is the factor by which the machine changes the input force. It equals the ratio of the output force to the input force. A wheel and axle may either increase or decrease the input force, depending on whether the input force is applied to the axle or the wheel. 
When charged particles accelerate , changing electric and magnetic fields radiate outward. The traveling electric and magnetic fields of an accelerating (often oscillating) charged particle are known as electromagnetic radiation or light. 
Most ocean waves are caused by winds. The size of a wave depends on how fast, how far, and how long the wind blows. Tsunamis are waves caused by earthquakes. 
Power Consumed at Rest The rate at which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities is called the metabolic rate. The total energy conversion rate of a person at rest is called the basal metabolic rate (BMR) and is divided among various systems in the body, as shown in Table 7.4. The largest fraction goes to the liver and spleen, with the brain coming next. Of course, during vigorous exercise, the energy consumption of the skeletal muscles and heart increase markedly. About 75% of the calories burned in a day go into these basic functions. The BMR is a function of age, gender, total body weight, and amount of muscle mass (which burns more calories than body fat). Athletes have a greater BMR due to this last factor. 
The extremely hot core of the sun radiates energy from nuclear fusion. 
An n-type (negative-type) semiconductor consists of silicon and an element such as phosphorus that gives the silicon crystal extra electrons. You can see this in the Figure above . An n-type semiconductor is like the negative terminal of a battery. 
In the previous lesson, we discussed pure substances and mixtures. We indicated that the components of a mixture could be separated by physical means, but the components of a pure substance could not. Pure substances can only be broken down further through chemical means. In this lesson, we list several methods for separating mixtures. We will also be looking at chemical changes which alter the chemical identity of a substance, and how to recognize when a chemical change is taking place. 
Animals and some bacteria and fungi carry out lactic acid fermentation. Lactic acid is a waste product of this process. Our muscles perform lactic acid fermentation during strenuous exercise, since oxygen cannot be delivered to the muscles quickly enough. The buildup of lactic acid is believed to make your muscles sore after exercise. Bacteria that produce lactic acid are used to make cheese and yogurt. The lactic acid causes the proteins in milk to thicken. Lactic acid also causes tooth decay, because bacteria use the sugars in your mouth for energy. 
Human overpopulation, which is crowding out other species. It also makes all the other causes of extinction worse. 
A compass needle lines up with Earth’s magnetic north pole. This is different from Earth’s geographic north pole, also called true north. The geographic north pole is the top of an imaginary line. This line is the axis around which Earth rotates. The geographic north pole is much like the spindle of a spinning top. The location of the geographic north pole does not change. However, the magnetic north pole shifts in location over time. Depending on where you live, you can correct for the difference between the two poles when you use a map and a compass ( Figure below ). 
Competitive Exclusion Principle Resources are often limited within a habitat and multiple species may compete to obtain them. All species have an ecological niche in the ecosystem, which describes how they acquire the resources they need and how they interact with other species in the community. The competitive exclusion principle states that two species cannot occupy the same niche in a habitat. In other words, different species cannot coexist in a community if they are competing for all the same resources. An example of this principle is shown in Figure 45.24, with two protozoan species, Paramecium aurelia and Paramecium caudatum. When grown individually in the laboratory, they both thrive. But when they are placed together in the same test tube (habitat), P. aurelia outcompetes P. caudatum for food, leading to the latter’s eventual extinction. 
Mammals are endothermic vertebrates that have four limbs and produce amniotic eggs. Defining traits of mammals are fur or hair and mammary glands. Mammals are noted for the many different ways they can move and their specialized limbs. 
Cancer Proteomics Genomes and proteomes of patients suffering from specific diseases are being studied to understand the genetic basis of the disease. The most prominent disease being studied with proteomic approaches is cancer. Proteomic approaches are being used to improve screening and early detection of cancer; this is achieved by identifying proteins whose expression is affected by the disease process. An individual protein is called a biomarker, whereas a set of proteins with altered expression levels is called a protein signature. For a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for early screening and detection of a cancer, it must be secreted in body fluids, such as sweat, blood, or urine, such that largescale screenings can be performed in a non-invasive fashion. The current problem with using biomarkers for the early detection of cancer is the high rate of false-negative results. A false negative is an incorrect test result that should have been positive. In other words, many cases of cancer go undetected, which makes biomarkers unreliable. Some examples of protein biomarkers used in cancer detection are CA-125 for ovarian cancer and PSA for prostate cancer. Protein signatures may be more reliable than biomarkers to detect cancer cells. Proteomics is also being used to develop individualized treatment plans, which involves the prediction of whether or not an individual will respond to specific drugs and the side effects that the individual may experience. Proteomics is also being used to predict the possibility of disease recurrence. The National Cancer Institute has developed programs to improve the detection and treatment of cancer. The Clinical Proteomic Technologies for Cancer and the Early Detection Research Network are efforts to identify protein signatures specific to different types of cancers. The Biomedical Proteomics Program is designed to identify protein signatures and design effective therapies for cancer patients. 
Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship in which both species benefit. An example of mutualism involves goby fish and shrimp (see Figure below ). The nearly blind shrimp and the fish spend most of their time together. The shrimp maintains a burrow in the sand in which both the fish and shrimp live. When a predator comes near, the fish touches the shrimp with its tail as a warning. Then, both fish and shrimp retreat to the burrow until the predator is gone. From their relationship, the shrimp gets a warning of approaching danger. The fish gets a safe retreat and a place to lay its eggs. 
You can see how Mendeleev organized the elements in the Figure below . From left to right across each row, elements are arranged by increasing atomic mass. Mendeleev discovered that if he placed eight elements in each row and then continued on to the next row, the columns of the table would contain elements with similar properties. He called the columns groups . They are sometimes called families, because elements within a group are similar but not identical to one another, like people in a family. 
Law of Refraction Figure 25.12 shows how a ray of light changes direction when it passes from one medium to another. As before, the angles are measured relative to a perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray crosses it. (Some of the incident light will be reflected from the surface, but for now we will concentrate on the light that is transmitted. ) The change in direction of the light ray depends on how the speed of light changes. The change in the speed of light is related to the indices of refraction of the media involved. In the situations shown in Figure 25.12, medium 2 has a greater index of refraction than medium 1. This means that the speed of light is less in medium 2 than in medium 1. Note that as shown in Figure 25.12(a), the direction of the ray moves closer to the perpendicular when it slows down. Conversely, as shown in Figure 25.12(b), the direction of the ray moves away from the perpendicular when it speeds up. The path is exactly reversible. In both cases, you can imagine what happens by thinking about pushing a lawn mower from a footpath onto grass, and vice versa. Going from the footpath to grass, the front wheels are slowed and pulled to the side as shown. This is the same change in direction as for light when it goes from a fast medium to a slow one. When going from the grass to the footpath, the front wheels can move faster and the mower changes direction as shown. This, too, is the same change in direction as for light going from slow to fast. 
The cells of the blastocyst form an inner cell mass and an outer cell layer, as shown in Figure below . The inner cell mass is called the embryoblast . These cells will soon develop into an embryo. The outer cell layer is called the trophoblast . These cells will develop into other structures needed to support and nourish the embryo. 
Thunderstorms are are known for their heavy rains and lightning. In strong thunderstorms, hail and high winds are also likely. Thunderstorms are very common. Worldwide, there are about 14 million of them each year! In the U. S. , they are most common — and strongest — in the Midwest. 
A major advantage of aerobic respiration is the amount of energy it releases. Without oxygen, organisms can split glucose into just two molecules of pyruvate. This releases only enough energy to make two ATP molecules. With oxygen, organisms can break down glucose all the way to carbon dioxide. This releases enough energy to produce up to 38 ATP molecules. Thus, aerobic respiration releases much more energy than anaerobic respiration. 
The survival of every ecosystem is dependent on the producers. Without producers capturing the energy from the sun and turning it into glucose, an ecosystem could not exist. On land, plants are the dominant producers. Phytoplankton , tiny photosynthetic organisms, are the most common producers in the oceans and lakes. Algae, which is the green layer you might see floating on a pond, are an example of phytoplankton. 
Sex hormones are chemical messengers that control sexual development and reproduction. The male reproductive system consists of structures that produce male gametes called sperm and secrete the male sex hormone testosterone. 
Thermal energy is the total energy of moving particles of matter. The transfer of thermal energy is called heat. Therefore, a heating system is a system for the transfer of thermal energy. Regardless of the type of heating system in a home, the basic function is the same: to produce thermal energy and transfer it to air throughout the house. 
Solubility may increase or decrease with temperature; the magnitude of this temperature dependence varies widely among compounds. Notice in particular the curves for NH4NO3 and CaCl2. The dissolution of ammonium nitrate in water is endothermic (ΔHsoln = +25.7 kJ/mol), whereas the dissolution of calcium chloride is exothermic (ΔHsoln = −68.2 kJ/mol), yet Figure 13.9 "Solubilities of Several Inorganic and Organic Solids in Water as a Function of Temperature" shows that the solubility of both compounds increases sharply with increasing temperature. In fact, the magnitudes of the changes in both enthalpy and entropy for dissolution are temperature dependent. Because the solubility of a compound is ultimately determined by relatively small differences between large numbers, there is generally no good way to predict how the solubility will vary with temperature. The variation of solubility with temperature has been measured for a wide range of compounds, and the results are published in many standard reference books. Chemists are often able to use this information to separate the components of a mixture byfractional crystallization, the separation of compounds on the basis of their solubilities in a given solvent. For example, if we have a mixture of 150 g of sodium acetate (CH3CO2Na) and 50 g of KBr, we can separate the two compounds by dissolving the mixture in 100 g of water at 80°C and then cooling the solution slowly to 0°C. According to the temperature curves in Figure 13.9 "Solubilities of Several Inorganic and Organic Solids in Water as a Function of Temperature", both compounds dissolve in water at 80°C, and all 50 g of KBr remains in solution at 0°C. Only about 36 g of CH3CO2Na are soluble in 100 g of water at 0°C, however, so approximately 114 g (150 g − 36 g) of Saylor URL: http://www. saylor. org/books. 
If you are painting indoors, there are more important concerns than just getting messy. You should also be concerned about breathing in the fumes from the paints. Making sure to get plenty of fresh air while painting is very important. Paint fumes can have serious health effects. Paint fumes are just one example of indoor air pollution. 
Figure 7.33 Newborn Skull The bones of the newborn skull are not fully ossified and are separated by large areas called fontanelles, which are filled with fibrous connective tissue. The fontanelles allow for continued growth of the skull after birth. At the time of birth, the facial bones are small and underdeveloped, and the mastoid process has not yet formed. 
Atherosclerosis normally begins in late childhood and is typically found in most major arteries. It does not usually have any early symptoms. Causes of atherosclerosis include a high-fat diet, high cholesterol, smoking, obesity, and diabetes. Atherosclerosis becomes a threat to health when the plaque buildup prevents blood circulation in the heart or the brain. A blocked blood vessel in the heart can cause a heart attack. Blockage of the circulation in the brain can cause a stroke. 
There are other measurable characteristics of a gas. One of them is temperature (T). Perhaps one can vary the temperature of a gas sample and note what effect it has on the other properties of the gas. Early scientists did just this, discovering that if the amount of a gas and its pressure are kept constant, then changing the temperature changes the volume (V). As temperature increases, volume increases; as temperature decreases, volume decreases. We say that these two characteristics are directly related. A mathematical relationship between V and T should be possible except for one thought: what temperature scale should we use? We know from Chapter 2 "Measurements" that science uses several possible temperature scales. Experiments show that the volume of a gas is related to its absolute temperature in Kelvin, not its temperature in degrees Celsius. If the temperature of a gas is expressed in kelvins, then experiments show that the ratio of volume to temperature is a constant:. 
The bones of the skull support the structures of the face and protect the brain. The skull consists of cranial bones and facial bones. The cranial bones form the cranial cavity, which encloses the brain and serves as an attachment site for muscles of the head and neck. In the adult they are tightly jointed with connective tissue and adjoining bones do not move. The auditory ossicles of the middle ear transmit sounds from the air as vibrations to the fluid-filled cochlea. The auditory ossicles consist of two malleus (hammer) bones, two incus (anvil) bones, and two stapes (stirrups), one on each side. Facial bones provide cavities for the sense organs (eyes, mouth, and nose), and serve as attachment points for facial muscles. The hyoid bone lies below the mandible in the front of the neck. It acts as a movable base for the tongue and is connected to muscles of the jaw, larynx, and tongue. The mandible forms a joint with the base of the skull. The mandible controls the opening to the mouth and hence, the airway and gut. 
The diffusion of water across a membrane because of a difference in concentration is called osmosis. 
The mechanical advantage of a machine is related to how it changes force. Explain this relationship. 
cell that transmits electrical impulses in the nervous system; commonly called nerve cell. 
Molecular and Formula Masses The molecular mass of a substance is the sum of the average masses of the atoms in one molecule of a substance. It is calculated by adding together the atomic masses of the elements in the substance, each multiplied by its subscript (written or implied) in the molecular formula. Because the units of atomic mass are atomic mass units, the units of molecular mass are also atomic mass units. The procedure for calculating molecular masses is illustrated in Example 1. 
Sugars are simple carbohydrates. Molecules of sugar have just a few carbon atoms. The simplest sugar is glucose (C 6 H 12 O 6 ). Glucose is the sugar that the cells of living things use for energy. Plants and some other organisms make glucose in the process of photosynthesis. Living things that cannot make glucose obtain it by consuming plants or these other organisms. 
Because the hydroxyl radical has an unpaired electron, it is highly reactive. (This is true of any substance with unpaired electrons, known as a free radical. ) This hydroxyl radical can react with all kinds of biological molecules (DNA, proteins, enzymes, and so on), causing damage to the molecules and disrupting physiological processes. Examples of direct and indirect damage are shown in Figure 21.32. 
Nonvascular plants were the first plants to evolve. Compared to other plants, their small size and lack of specialized structures, such as vascular tissue, stems, leaves, or flowers, explains why these plants evolved first. The first nonvascular plants to evolve were the liverworts. The hornworts evolved somewhat later, and mosses apparently evolved last. Of all the bryophytes, mosses are most similar to vascular plants. Presumably, they share the most recent common ancestor with vascular plants. 
Under a microscope, salt crystals are cubes. 
The majority of fungi can reproduce both asexually and sexually. This allows them to adjust to conditions in the environment. They can spread quickly through asexual reproduction when conditions are stable. They can increase their genetic variation through sexual reproduction when conditions are changing and variation may help them survive. 
Excretion is any process in which excess water or wastes are removed from the body. Excretion is the job of the excretory system. Organs of excretion include the large intestine, liver, skin, lungs, and kidneys. 
Of course, a net external force is needed to cause any acceleration, just as Newton proposed in his second law of motion. So a net external force is needed to cause a centripetal acceleration. In Centripetal Force, we will consider the forces involved in circular motion. PhET Explorations: Ladybug Motion 2D Learn about position, velocity and acceleration vectors. Move the ladybug by setting the position, velocity or acceleration, and see how the vectors change. Choose linear, circular or elliptical motion, and record and playback the motion to analyze the behavior. 
are attached to the end of each bronchiole. At the end of each duct are approximately 100 alveolar sacs, each containing 20 to 30 alveoli that are 200 to 300 microns in diameter. Gas exchange occurs only in alveoli. Alveoli are made of thin-walled parenchymal cells, typically one-cell thick, that look like tiny bubbles within the sacs. Alveoli are in direct contact with capillaries (one-cell thick) of the circulatory system. Such intimate contact ensures that oxygen will diffuse from alveoli into the blood and be distributed to the cells of the body. In addition, the carbon dioxide that was produced by cells as a waste product will diffuse from the blood into alveoli to be exhaled. The anatomical arrangement of capillaries and alveoli emphasizes the structural and functional relationship of the respiratory and circulatory systems. Because there are so many alveoli (~300 million per lung) within each alveolar sac and so many sacs at the end of each alveolar duct, the lungs have a sponge-like consistency. This organization produces a very large surface area that is available for gas exchange. The surface area of alveoli in the lungs is approximately 75 m2. This large surface area, combined with the thin-walled nature of the alveolar parenchymal cells, allows gases to easily diffuse across the cells. 
Hair, hair follicle, and oil glands. The oil, called sebum, helps to prevent water loss from the skin. The sebaceous gland secretes sebum, which waterproofs the skin and hair. 
Histology The liver has three main components: hepatocytes, bile canaliculi, and hepatic sinusoids. A hepatocyte is the liver’s main cell type, accounting for around 80 percent of the liver's volume. These cells play a role in a wide variety of secretory, metabolic, and endocrine functions. Plates of hepatocytes called hepatic laminae radiate outward from the portal vein in each hepatic lobule. Between adjacent hepatocytes, grooves in the cell membranes provide room for each bile canaliculus (plural = canaliculi). These small ducts accumulate the bile produced by hepatocytes. From here, bile flows first into bile ductules and then into bile ducts. The bile ducts unite to form the larger right and left hepatic ducts, which themselves merge and exit the liver as the common hepatic duct. This duct then joins with the cystic duct from the gallbladder, forming the common bile duct through which bile flows into the small intestine. A hepatic sinusoid is an open, porous blood space formed by fenestrated capillaries from nutrient-rich hepatic portal veins and oxygen-rich hepatic arteries. Hepatocytes are tightly packed around the fenestrated endothelium of these spaces, giving them easy access to the blood. From their central position, hepatocytes process the nutrients, toxins, and waste materials carried by the blood. Materials such as bilirubin are processed and excreted into the bile canaliculi. Other materials including proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates are processed and secreted into the sinusoids or just stored in the cells until called upon. The hepatic sinusoids combine and send blood to a central vein. Blood then flows through a hepatic vein into the inferior vena cava. This means that blood and bile flow in opposite directions. The hepatic sinusoids also contain star-shaped reticuloendothelial cells (Kupffer cells), phagocytes that remove dead red and white blood cells, bacteria, and other foreign material that enter the sinusoids. The portal triad is a distinctive arrangement around the perimeter of hepatic lobules, consisting of three basic structures: a bile duct, a hepatic artery branch, and a hepatic portal vein branch. 
In a pedigree, squares symbolize males, and circles represent females. A horizontal line joining a male and female indicates that the couple had offspring. Vertical lines indicate offspring which are listed left to right, in order of birth. Shading of the circle or square indicates an individual who has the trait being traced. The inheritance of the recessive trait is being traced. A is the dominant allele and a is recessive. An "affected" individual has the trait or characteristic (or disease) in question. 
Liquids that mix with water in all proportions are usually polar substances or substances that form hydrogen bonds. For such liquids, the dipole-dipole attractions (or hydrogen bonding) of the solute molecules with the solvent molecules are at least as strong as those between molecules in the pure solute or in the pure solvent. Hence, the two kinds of molecules mix easily. Likewise, nonpolar liquids are miscible with each other because there is no appreciable difference in the strengths of solute-solute, solvent-solvent, and solute-solvent intermolecular attractions. The solubility of polar molecules in polar solvents and of nonpolar molecules in nonpolar solvents is, again, an illustration of the chemical axiom “like dissolves like. ” Two liquids that do not mix to an appreciable extent are called immiscible. Layers are formed when we pour immiscible liquids into the same container. Gasoline, oil (Figure 11.15), benzene, carbon tetrachloride, some paints, and many other nonpolar liquids are immiscible with water. The attraction between the molecules of such nonpolar liquids and polar water molecules is ineffectively weak. The only strong attractions in such a mixture are between the water molecules, so they effectively squeeze out the molecules of the nonpolar liquid. The distinction between immiscibility and miscibility is really one of degrees, so that miscible liquids are of infinite mutual solubility, while liquids said to be immiscible are of very low (though not zero) mutual solubility. 
Roundworms may be free-living or parasitic organisms. Free-living worms are found mainly in freshwater habitats. Some live in moist soil. They generally feed on bacteria, fungi, protozoa, or decaying organic matter. By breaking down organic matter, they play an important role in the carbon cycle. 
Thalamus The thalamus is a collection of nuclei that relay information between the cerebral cortex and the periphery, spinal cord, or brain stem. All sensory information, except for the sense of smell, passes through the thalamus before processing by the cortex. Axons from the peripheral sensory organs, or intermediate nuclei, synapse in the thalamus, and thalamic neurons project directly to the cerebrum. It is a requisite synapse in any sensory pathway, except for olfaction. The thalamus does not just pass the information on, it also processes that information. For example, the portion of the thalamus that receives visual information will influence what visual stimuli are important, or what receives attention. The cerebrum also sends information down to the thalamus, which usually communicates motor commands. This involves interactions with the cerebellum and other nuclei in the brain stem. The cerebrum interacts with the basal nuclei, which involves connections with the thalamus. The primary output of the basal nuclei is to the thalamus, which relays that output to the cerebral cortex. The cortex also sends information to the thalamus that will then influence the effects of the basal nuclei. 
Ice wedging happens because water expands as it goes from liquid to solid. When the temperature is warm, water works its way into cracks in rock. When the temperature cools below freezing, the water turns to ice and expands. The ice takes up more space. Over time, this wedges the rock apart. Ice wedging is very effective at weathering. You can find large piles of broken rock at the base of a slope. These rocks were broken up by ice wedging. Once loose, they tumbled down the slope. 
Ionic bonding typically occurs when it is easy for one atom to lose one or more electrons and another atom to gain one or more electrons. However, some atoms won’t give up or gain electrons easily. Yet they still participate in compound formation. How? There is another mechanism for obtaining a complete valence shell: sharing electrons. When electrons are shared between two atoms, they make a bond called a covalent bond. Let us illustrate a covalent bond by using H atoms, with the understanding that H atoms need only two electrons to fill the 1s subshell. Each H atom starts with a single electron in its valence shell:. 
An ionic bond is the force of attraction that holds together positive and negative ions. It forms when atoms of a metallic element give up electrons to atoms of a nonmetallic element. Figure below shows how this happens. 
Seed plants are vascular plants that reproduce with seeds. Modern seed plants are called spermatophytes. Seeds allow the plants to reproduce without water. Most vascular plants today are seed plants. 
The mass spectrometer measures the percent abundance of different isotopes in a given sample. 
Evolution occurs in a population when its allele frequencies change over time. For example, the frequency of the A allele might change from 0.7 to 0.8. If that happens, evolution has occurred. What causes allele frequencies to change? The answer is forces of evolution. 
Scientists study meteorites to learn about Earth’s interior. Meteorites formed in the early solar system. These objects represent early solar system materials. Some meteorites are made of iron and nickel. They are thought to be very similar to Earth's core ( Figure below ). An iron meteorite is the closest thing to a sample of the core that scientists can hold in their hands!. 
No doubt you already have a good idea of what temperature is. You might say that it’s how warm or cool something feels. In physics, temperature is defined as the average kinetic energy of the particles of matter. When particles of matter move more quickly, they have more kinetic energy, so their temperature is higher. With a higher temperature, matter feels warmer. When particles move more slowly, they have less kinetic energy on average, so their temperature is lower. With a lower temperature, matter feels cooler. 
The nitrogen cycle moves nitrogen back and forth between the atmosphere and organisms. 
An antigen that causes an allergy is called an allergen. 
Abscisic acid is misnamed because it was once believed to play a role in abscission (the dropping of leaves, fruits, and flowers), but we now know abscission is caused by ethylene. The actual role of abscisic acid is to close the stomata, the tiny openings in leaves that allow substances to enter and leave, and to maintain dormancy. When a plant is stressed due to lack of water, abscisic acid tells the stomata to close. This prevents water loss through the stomata. 
Examples of protozoa include amoebas and paramecia. 
Eukaryotic cells contain a nucleus and other organelles. They include the mitochondrion, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, vesicles, vacuoles, lysosomes, and—in animal cells—centrioles. Each type of organelle has a special function. 
The male gametophyte produces flagellated sperm that must swim to the egg formed by the female gametophyte. For this reason, sexual reproduction must happen in the presence of water. Therefore, nonvascular plants tend to live in moist environments. Though the life of a nonvascular seedless plant is a cycle, this can be considered the initial step in the life cycle. 
With the help of muscles, joints allow the body to move with relatively little force. 
Catalysts interact with reactants so the reaction can occur by an alternate pathway that has a lower activation energy. Activation energy is the energy needed to start a reaction. When activation energy is lower, more reactant particles have enough energy to react so the reaction goes faster. Many catalysts work like the one in the Figure below . (You can see an animated version at the following URL. ) The catalyst brings the reactants together by temporarily bonding with them. This makes it easier and quicker for the reactants to react together. Notice how the catalyst is released by the product molecule at the end of the reaction. 
Sulfuric acid is produced in extremely large quantities in the United States (about 40 million tons/year). This material is manufactured by oxidizing sulfur to form sulfur trioxide. The SO 3 is then dissolved in water to form the sulfuric acid. Most of the sulfuric acid produced is used in fertilizers. This acid is also found in lead-acid car batteries. 
Digestion of Carbohydrates Carbohydrate digestion begins in the mouth (Figure 20.5 "The Principal Events and Sites of Carbohydrate Digestion"), where salivary α-amylase attacks the α-glycosidic linkages in starch, the main carbohydrate ingested by humans. Cleavage of the glycosidic linkages produces a mixture of dextrins, maltose, and glucose. (For more information about carbohydrates, see Chapter 16 "Carbohydrates". ) The α-amylase mixed into the food remains active as the food passes through the esophagus, but it is rapidly inactivated in the acidic environment of the stomach. Figure 20.5 The Principal Events and Sites of Carbohydrate Digestion.